Skip to main content
web
texts
movies
audio
software
image
logo
Toggle navigation
ABOUT
CONTACT
BLOG
PROJECTS
HELP
DONATE
JOBS
VOLUNTEER
PEOPLE
search

Search
 Search
upload
personSIGN IN
ABOUT
 
CONTACT
 
BLOG
 
PROJECTS
 
HELP
 
DONATE
 
JOBS
 
VOLUNTEER
 
PEOPLE
Full text of "Geography, physical, economic, regional"
See other formats
Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



i 





LIPPINCOTTS SCHOOL TEXT SERIES 

EDITED BY WILLIAM F. RUSSELL, Ph.D. 

DSAN, COIXBOB OF BDUCATION, STATK UNIVEBSITT OF IOWA 



GEOGRAPHY 

PHYSICAL, ECONOMIC, KE6I0NAL 

BY 

JAMES FRANKLIN CHAMBERLAIN 

POBMKRLT CHAIBMAN OF DKPARTMKNT OF OBOGIIAFHT, UNIVKBBITT 
OF CAUFOBNIA, SOUTHSBM BBAMGH, LOS AMOCLBB,- CALIFORNU 



LIPPINCOTT'S SCHOOL TEXT SERIES 

EDITED BY WILLIAM F. RUSSELL, Ph.D. 



GEOGRAPHY 

PHYSICAL, ECONOMIC, REGIONAL 

BY 

JAMES FRANKLIN ^HAMBERLAIN, Ed.B., S.B. 



Adthor ok " How We Ahe Feu," " How We Ake Clothed," " How We 
Ahb Sheltehed," " How We Travel," " Field and Laboratobt Exer- 
cisGB IN Phtsical Geography," and Joint Adthor with Arthur Hekbt 
Chamberlain of "North America," "Europe," "Asia," "South 
America," "Aibica," "Oceania," and " Conbbhvation and Thrift." 



SIO ILLUSTRATIONS 



PHILADELPHIA, LONDON, CHICAGO 
J. B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY 



k^ I '^ G> 



/--^ 



OOPTftlGHT, I92I, BT J. B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY 



» • * ^ • • • 

•• • "^ • • • 






BUetratyped and Printed by J. B. Lippineott Company 
The WaehinaUm Sgtuire Press, Philaddphiat U. S, A, 



PREFACE 

To prepare the youth of our land to be self-supporting, to intelli- 
gently- participate in local and national affairs and to be useful and 
honored members of society, are among the great aims of education. 

The World War stimulated the reconstruction of our educational 
scheme, and in all parts of this country efforts are beii^ made so to 
recast our courses of study that school-education may be of greater 
value in the affairs of life. 

In this work the secondary schools are being carefully studied. 
This is very important because comparatively few of our young 
people extend their school life beyond the high school. This means 
that the studies selected for this four-year period should be chosen 
because of their actual value to the average individual, rather than 
because they prepare a few students to enter college. 

That the future history of our country is to be inseparably con- 
nected with that of the rest of the world is now an assured fact. 
No longer can our national life be one of isolation, even if we so de- 
sired. To perform efficiently and justly our part in world and national 
affairs, we must know geography. 

It is generally conceded that geography is one of the broadest of 
subjects, and that it cannot, in its deeper significance, be grasped 
by pupils in the elementary schools. This means that geography 
should be taught in every secondary school, and in every institution 
of higher learning in the United States. 

The great need is for a fuller grasp of physical and economic 
geography and the regional geography of our own country. The 
report made by the National Education Committee in 1908 empha- 
sized this, as did the report made in the same year by the Committee 
of the Association of American Geographers. 

In the present volume physical geography is presented as the 
necessary foundation. The work is fully humanized arid many points 
which are presented in the ordinary course in physical geography 
are here omitted. The student is led to study geographic forms and 
processes, not as things and conditions apart from hmnan affairs 
but rather in their relations to the life of man. 

Economic geography is presented because of its very practical 
value to men and women in every walk of life. A comprehensive 



^86453 



vi Preface 

view of industrial and commercial conditions as applied to the world 
is given. Many figures are of necessity employed, but as those rela- 
ting to a given year are usually of little value as applied to any other 
year, the author has, for the most part, used five- or ten-year averages. 
These vary but little from year to year. Some of the averages close 
with the year 1913, in part because conditions became very abnormal 
after that date and in part because of the impossibility of securing 
accurate information applying to certain countries during the war 
period. The figures of the Fourteenth Census, in so far as they are 
available, have been used. * 

A somewhat intensive study of the geography of the United States 
is of the utmost importance. How superficial is the knowledge of 
our country possessed by the average person is well known. As to 
the natural regions into which the United States should be divided, 
there is some difference of opinion. The regions here used are as 
satisfactory and as helpful as any in bringing about the desired result. 

Many persons have assisted in the preparation of this volume, to 
all of whom I am very grateful. I am especially indebted to Mrs. 
Kathleen Beck, Instructor in Geography in the University of Cali- 
fornia, Southern Branch, who read the entire manuscript and pre- 
pared most of the drawings. Miss Ruth E. Baugh, Instructor in 
Geography, Dr. Fred A. Howe, Assistant Professor of English, and 
Dr. Ford A. Carpenter, Lecturer in Meteorology, all of the above 
named institution, rendered valuable service. My brother, Arthur 
H. Chamberlain, Secretary of the California Council of Education, 
furnished many very helpful suggestions. To those who have kindly 
supplied pictures, credit is elsewhere given. 

James Franklin Chamberlain. 
December, 1920. 



CONTENTS 



CHAPTER PAGE 

GEOGRAPHY— PHYSICAL, ECONOMIC, REGIONAL 
PART ONE— PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY 1-167 

^ I. Man and His Physical Environment 1-17 

Man and Climate — Man and Topography — Man and the 
Soil — Man and Rivers — Man and Minerals — Man and 

the Coast — Man and Forests. 

» 

11. The Earth and Its Neighbors 18-34 

The Earth 

Form of the Earth — ^Latitude and Longitude — Rotation — 
Lonratude and Time — International Date Line — Stand- 
ard Time — Revolution— <Uhange of Seasons — ^The Zones 
— The Sun — The Solar System — ^The Moon — Gravitv and 
Gravitation — ^The Nebular Hypothesis — ^The Planet- 
esimal Hypothesis — The Stars. 

, - m. The Atmosphere 35-48 

General Statement — ^Atmosphere Diffuses Heat and 
Light — ^Atmosphere Distributes Moisture — Atmosphere 
/ Aids in the Distribution of Life — ^Atmosphere Aids in 

Weathering and Erosion — ^Atmosphere a Part of the 
Earth — ^Extent of the Atmosphere — Composition of the 
Atmosphere — Oxygen — Nitrogen — Carbon Dioxide — 
Water Vapor — ^Argon — Ozone — ^Dust and Other Impuri- 
ties — ^Temperature — ^Pressure — ^Future of the Atmosphere. 

,- IV. General Movements op the Atmosphere 49-59 

^ Cause of Circulation — Isotherms — Isobars — ^Trade Winds 

— Doldrum Belt — ^Anti-Trades — Westerlies — ^The Mon- 
soons — ^Land and Sea Breezes — Mountain and Valley 
Breezes. 

V. Storms 60-74 

Cyclones 

Cyclone Tracks — Rate of Movement — Clouds and Pre- 
cipitation — ^Anti-cyclones — Hot and Cold Waves. 

Hurricanes 

Resemblance to Cyclones — ^Place and Time — ^Area — 
Transmission — Description — ^Tidal Wave — Cause — The 
Galveston Hurricane— -Geography of Galveston. 

Thunderstorms 
Place and Time — Relation to Cyclones. 

Tornadoes 

Appearance — Size — Distribution — Frequency — Damage 
— Pressure— St. Louis Tornado — ^Theories. 

vii 



viii Contents 

VI. The Moisture of the Atmosphere 75-86 

. General Statement — Capacity of the Atmosphere for 
Moisture — ^Absolute Humidity — Relative Humidity — 
Proof that the Atmosphere Contains Moisture — Varia- 
tion in Humidity — Evaporation — Condensation. 

Forms of Precipitation 

Dew — ^Fog — Clouds — ^Kinds of Clouds — ^Frost — Snow — 
Hail. 

> Rainfall 

Rainfall in North America — Fluctuations in Rainfall — 
Rainfall and Forests — Production of Rain by Artificial 
Means. 

(^ VII. The Weather and the Weather Bureau 87-93 

General Statement — Making and Distributing the Map — 
Benefits Derived — ^Reasons for Failure of Forecasts. 

^\ VIH. Climate and Its Relations to Life 94-1 CO 

General Statement — ^Torrid Zone Climate — Frigid Zone 
Climate — ^Temperate Zone Climate— Climate imon Moun- 
tains — Ocean Climate— Climate on East and West Coasts 
— Climate in the Interior. 

IX. Mountains and Their Relations to Life 101-116 

^ Distribution of Population — Isolation of Moimtain 

Peoples — Mountains and Industry — Mountains and 
Forests — Mountains and Water Supply — Mountains as 
Barriers — Mountains and History — Mountains as Health 
and Pleasure Resorts — Origin of Moimtains — ^Earth- 
quakes — ^Volcanoes — Geysers. 

^ X, Plains and Life 117-121 

Plains and Distribution of Population — ^Plains and Agri- 
culture — Plains and the Movem«its of People— Origin of 
Plains. 

oXI. Rivers and Man 122-136 

/ Destructive Work of Streams-rFalls — Constructive Work 

of Streams — Distribution of Streams — Rivers as Carriers 
— Floods in Rivers — Rivers and Water Supply — Rivers 
and Railroad Construction — Rivers and History. 

~ XII. Lakes: Their Origin and Uses 137-142 

Distribution — Origin of Lake Basins — Salt Lakes — 
Changes in Lake Basins — Relation of Lakes to Man. 

X XIII. Glaciers 143-151 

General Statement — Movement of Glaciers — Character- 
istics of Glaciers — Results of Glacial Movement—Glacial 
Deposits — Influence of Glaciers upon Life. 

'' XrV. The Soil 152-156 

General Statement — Origin of Soils — Kinds of Soil — 
Natural Fertihty. 



Contents ix 

^ XV. The Ocean .157-167 

y The Coast line — ^Examples of Irregular Coasts — Influ- 

ence of Irregular Coasts — ^Examples of Regular Coasts — 
Influence of Regular Coasts — Depths of Harbors — ^Pro- 
tection to Shipping — Climate and Coast Line — Influences 
Shaping Coast Lines — The Ocean Basin — ^Temperature — 
li^t — ^Pressure — ^life — ^Waves — Ocean Currents — ^Tides. 

PART TWO— AGRICULTURE AND AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS 169-260 

XVI. The Response op the Soil .169-180 

General Statement/— Government Aid— ^il Surveys — 
Bureau of Plant Industry — Bureau of Animal Industry — 
Movement Back to the Soil — Fertilizing the Soil — Rota- 
tion of Cropsr— Cultivation of the Soil — Irrigating Crops. 

XVIL Plant Life 181-186 

General Statement — ^Two Divisions of Life — The Life 
Cycle of Plants — Man's Dependence upon Plants — Con- 
ditions Necessary for Growtn — How Plants Manufacture 
Food — Reproduction — Dispersal of Plants — Natiu*al Pro- 
tection. 

XVIII. The Cereals 187-204 

General Statement— Com — ^Wheat— Oats — ^Rye — Barley 
— ^Rice — ^Buckwheat. 

XIX. The Fiber Plants 205-221 

Cotton 

Description — Cultivation and Preparation — Shipment — 
Manufacturing Centers. 

Flax 

History — Description — Distribution -^ Manufacture — 
Products. 

Hemp 

History — ^Description — Cultivation — Distribution — Uses. 

Jute • 

Abaca or Manila Hemp — Henequen. 
XX. Beverage Plants 222-229 

Coffee, Tea 

Climatic Conditions — Picking and Preparation — ^Tea 
Growing in the United States — Trade — Cocoa — Mat^. 

XXI. Froits 230-244 

General Statement — ^Apples — ^Peaches — ^Prunes — Figs — 
Grapes — Raisins — Wine— Citrus Fruits — Olives — Rne- 
apples — Bananas — Dates. 

XXII. Miscellaneous Crops 245-260 

Cane Sugar 
General Statement — Distribution — Manufacture. 



X Contents 

BbbtSuga-r 

General Statement — Cultivation and Manufactiu'e — Pro- 
duction — Uses. 

Maple Sugar 

General Statement — Manufacture — Production. 

Potatoes 

General Statement — Distribution and Production — Food 
Value. 

Other Crops 

Hay — Tobacco — Hops — Cocoanuts — Peanuts. 

PART THREE— THE FORESTS AND MAN 261-288 

XXin. Forests and Forestry 261-272 

General Statement^ — Distribution of Forests — ^Forests and 
Floods — Forests and Sand Dunes — ^Forests and Rainfall — 
Reforestation — Cost and Returns. 

XXIV. Forest Products 273-288 

Lumber 

General Statement— Distribution of Lumbering — Opera- 
tion — ^Production — ^Kinds — Uses of Timber — Our Trade 
in Lumber — Prices — ^Future of the Lumber Industry. 

Rubber 

General Statement — Distribution — ^Processes — Uses — Ex- 
ports— Gutta Percha— Turpentine — Resin — Pitch — ^Tar 
and Creosote— Tanbark — Cork. 

PART FOUR— ANIMALS AND THEIR RELATION TO MAN . . .289-312 

XXV. Animals as Sources op Food 289-302 

General Statement — The Meat Industry — The Dairy In- 
dustry — Butter — Cheese — Tue Poultry Industry — The 
Fishing Industry — Fish — Oysters — ^The Bee Industry. 

XXVI. Animals as Sources of Clothing 303-308 

Wool — ^Leather — Silk — ^Furs. 

XXVII. Draft Animals 309-312 

Horses — Mules — ^Asses — Cattle — ^Water Buffalo — ^Ele- 
phant — ^Reindeer — Camels — ^Llama — Dogs. 

PART FIVE— MINERALS IN THEIR RELATION TO MAN 313-346 

XXVIII. Minerals as Fuels 313-326 

General Statement. 

Coal 

General Statement — Origin — Distribution — Production — 
Mining — ^The Coal Trade — Cost — History — Future. 

Petroleum 

History — Origin — Distribution and Production — Uses — 
Operation. 



\l 



\f 



CoNTENlft XI 

Natural Gas 
XXIX. BxHLDiNG Stones and Clay Pboducts 327-331 

Stone 

General Statement — Granite — ^Traprock — Sandstone — 
Limestone — Marble — Slate. 

Clay Products 
Brick — Pottery. 
XXX. The Metallic Minerals 332-341 

Iron 

General Statement — Smelting and Refining — Distribu- 
tion — Growth of the Industry — Centers of the Industry — 
Copper — ^Lead — Tin — Zinc — Aluminum — Platinum — 
Quicksilvei^— iSilver. 

Gold 

General Statement — Processes — Distribution— Influences. 
> XXXI. Miscellaneous Minerals 342-346 

Salt 

Occurrence — Distribution and Production — The Indus- 
try — Commerce — ^tJses. 

Sulphur 

Distribution — ^Production — Commerce — Uses. 

• 

Mineral Waters 
Distribution — ^Production — Commerce. 

Diamonds 
Distribution — Production. 

PART SIX— TRANSPORTATION AND COMMUNICATION 347-369 

■ 

XXXII. Transportation by Land 347-353 \ 

General Statement — ^Early Roads in the United States — 
Wagon Roads of the Present Day — Railroads — Improve- 
ments in Railroad Transportation — Routes and Topog- 
raphy. 

XXXIII. IiHAND Waterways 354-358 

General Statement — Inland Waterways in North America 
— Inland Waterways in Europe-Finland Waterways in 
Africa — Inland Waterways in China — Inland Waterways 
in Austraha — Inland Waterways in South America. 

XXXIV. Ocean Transportation 359-364 

General Statement — Ocean Routes — Determining Posi- 
tion at Sea — Harbors. 

XXXV. Aerul Navigation 365, 366 

XXXVI. Communication 367-369 

Primitive Means — Mail Service^ — ^Telegraph — The Tele- 
phone — The Submarine Cable. 



xii Contents 

/ PART SEVEN— REGIONAL GEOGRAPHY OF THE UNITED 

STATES 371-499 



/ 



XXXVII. The UNiTia> States as a Whole. 371-380 

General Statement — Coast Line — ^Topography — Hydro- 

g-aphy — Climate — Forests — Soil — Manufacturing and 
onmieroe — Roads — ^Population. 

XXXVIII. The New England Province 381-392 

General Statement— Topography — ^Influenoe of the Gla- 
cier — ^Hydrography — Chmate — ^Forests — Influence of the 
Ocean — ^Agriculture — Mineral Wealth — Industries — Pop- 
ulation. 

Cities 
Boston — ^Providence. 

^ XXXrX. New York State 393-402 

* General Statement — ^Topography — Hydrography — Influ- 
ence of the Glacier — Chmate— -Mineral Wealth — ^Routes 
of Travel — ^Agriculture — Industries. 

Cities 
New York City — Buffalo — Distribution of Population. 

XL. The Atlantic Coastal Plain 403-412 

General Statement — Description — Hydrography— Cli- 
mate — Soil — Agriculture — Forests — Mineral Wealth — 
Manufacturing. 

Cities 

Philadelphia — Baltimore — Washington — Savannah — 
Atlanta. 

XLI. The Gulp Plain 413-419 

General Statement— Climate — ^Rivers — Forest Resource 
— Mineral Wealth — Industries. 

Cities 
^ New Orleans — ^Birmingham — Memphis — Galveston. 

XLII. The Appalachian Province 420-424 

General Statement — ^Economic Relations — Relations to 
Travel and Settlement — Climate — ^Effects of Isolation. 

XLIII. The East Central States 425-437 

General Statement — Influence of Topography — Influence 
of the Glacier— Climate — The Forest Resource — ^The 
Mineral Resource — ^Hydrography — ^Land Transportation 
— ^Industries. 

Cities 

Cleveland — Cincinnati — Columbus — Gary -^-Detroit — 
Grand Rapids— Chicago — Milwaukee — Superior. 

XlilV. The West Central States .438-451 

General Statement — Surface Features— Black Hills — 
Hydrography — Influence of Climate — ^Agriculture and^ 
Stock Raismg — Forest Resource — Mineral Wealth — ^^ 
Manufactures — ^Railroads. 



Contents xiii 



Cities 



St. Louis — ^Kansas City — ^Topeka — Omaha — St. Paul — 
Minneapolis — ^Duluth. 

XLV. The Rocky Mountain and Great Basin Pbovincbs 462-460 

General Statement — Influence of Topography — ^Hydro- 
graphy — Influence of Climate — ^Agriculture — ^Vegetation 
— Influence of Mineral Wealth — ^Transportation. 

Cities 
Denver — Salt Lake City. 

L( XLVI. The Pacific Coast States 461-479 



Position — Coast Line — Influence of Topography — ^Hydro- 
phy — M* •"-'<" '^ ^« . 

lustries. 



Kraphy — Mineral Wealth — Forest Resource— -Climate — 
Indui 



/ 



CmES 

^ Los Angeles — San Francisco — ^Portland — Seattle — Spo- 
kane. 

XLVIL Alaska 480-486 

Area and Population — Influence of Climate— The Coast 
Line — Topography — Rivers — Furs — Mineral Wealth — 
Fishing — ^Agriculture — Roads — Influence of Scenery — 
Cities. 

/ XLYIII. Insulab Possessions of the United States 487-499 



Porto Rico 

General Statement — ^Topography — Influence of Climate — 
Industries — ^Roads — Citie»^— Inhabitants. 

The Hawaiian Islands 

General Statement — ^Volcanoes — Climate — ^Agriculture — 
Manufacturing — History-^-Cities — Population. 

The Philippine Islands 

General Statement — Climate — Forests — ^Agriculture — 
Mineral Wealth — Cities — People. 

Cub Samoan Possessions 

Guam 

The Canal Zone 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 

Fia. PAGB 

1. A Sahara desert scene. The Mohammedan driver hobbles the animal's 

foot while at prayer 2 

2. A scene in polar regions. Peary's ship " Roosevelt" icebound 4 

3. A tropical scene 5 

4. Entrance to a tunnel 8 

5. Roosevelt Dam, Salt River, Arizona 11 

6. An irregular coast 14 

7. A forest 15 

8. International date line 22 

9. Standard time belts 23 

10. Change of seasons 26 

11. A talus slope 38 

12. January isothermal map of the world 50 

13. July isothermal map of the world 51 

14. January isobaric map of the world 53 

15. July isobaric map of the world 54 

16. The prevaiUng winds 55 

17. Winds and pressure in- India in July 57 

18. Winds and pressure in India in January 57 

19 to 21. Progress of a temperate latitude cyclone 62, 63, 65 

22. Average hurricane tracks for June, July, August, September and Octooer 66 

23. A tornado 71 

24. Cumulus clouds 78 

25. Relation of snow to man 80 

26. Precipitation chart of the world 84 

27. Life in the tropical zone 102 

28. Relation between temperature and altitude 103 

29. Transportation in a mountainous region 106 

30. A mountain resort 108 

31. Influence of mountains upon temperature 109 

32. Offset fence for earthquake in Caufomia Ill 

33. An anticlinal fold in sandstones and shales near base of Upper Silurian, 

Maryland •. 112 

34. Beehive Geyser, Yellowstone National Park 114 

35. Mt. Adams, a volcanic cone 115 

36. View of a prairie on the Western Great Plains 118 

37. Upstream development of a gully 123 

38. The Grand Canyon of the Colorado 124 

39. Vernal Falls. Yosemite Valley 125 

40. Relation of stream permanency to water level 128 

41. Sand spread over fertile lowlands bordering Catawba River 133 

42. Railroad following river valley 134 

43. Crater Lake, Oregon 138 

44. Vegetation filling Upper Klamath Lake, Oregon 139 

45. Lake Louise, British Columbia^ a glacial lake 140 

46. Map of the United States showmg glaciated area 144 

47. A glacier, summit of Mt. Hood 145 

48. Crevasse on Elliott Glacier. North side of Mt. Hood 146 

49. An iceberg 148 

XV 



xvi List of Illustrations 

50. A moraine on Mt. Shasta 150 

51. Roots of tree breaking rock 153 

52. A seaport 157 

53. An irregular coast 159 

54. A regular coast 161 

55. Work of waves, La Jolla, California 163 

56. Wave-cut terraces on the California coast 164 

57. A modem farm house 172 

58. A good rural road i^ Ohio 173 

59. An ordinary plow 175 

60. A ^ng-plow 176 

61. Pnncipai irrigation projects in the western United States 177 

62. Roosevelt Dam 178 

63. Irrigation canal near Mesa, Arizona 179 

64. Desert vegetation 186 

65. A com field 188 

66. World's production of com 189 

67. Production of com in.the United States 189 

68. Harvesting wheat 191 

69. World's production of wheat 193 

70. Production of wheat in the United States 194 

71. Loading wheat at Melbourne, Victoria 195 

72. World's production of oats 197 

73. Production of oats in the United States 197 

74. Chief rye-producing states , 198 

75. Chief barley-producing states 198 

76. Plowing a rice field in the Philippines 200 

77. A rice field in the United States 202 

78. World's production of rice 203 

79. Production of rice in the United States 203 

80. World's production of cotton 206 

81. Production of cotton in the United States 206 

82. Cotton picking 207 

S3. Cotton awaiting shipment 208 

84. Baling cotton 209 

85. River steamboat loaded with baled cotton 210 

86. A flax field 211 

87. Flaxhackles 213 

88. Cutting hemp by hand 215 

89. Abacd (Manila hemp) injured by wind 217 

90. Weighing hemp upon delivery at Manila 218 

91. A coffee plantation 223 

92. Picking tea 225 

93. Gathermg cocoa pods 227 

94. An apple orchard 231 

95. Diying peaches '. . . . 233 

96. Drying seedless raisins 235 

97. Fumigating orange trees 236 

98. Where the pineapples grow 238 

99. A banana plantation 240 

100. Adate pahn tree 242 

101. Sugar plantation near CaroUna, Porto Rico 245 

102. World s production of cane sugar 246 

103. World's production of beet sugar ' 247 

104. Making maple sugar 249 

105. Potato field near Greeley, Colorado 250 

106. World's production of potatoes 252 



List of Illustrations xvii 

07. Production of potatoes in the United States 252 

08. Production of hay in the United States 253 

09. A Maryland tobacco field 254 

10. World's production of tobacco 254 

11. Production of tobacco in the United States 254 

12. Picking hops 256 

13. Cocoanut trees, Tahiti 257 

14. A peanut digger 259 

15. Forest belts iSt the United States 263 

16. A well-managed wood lot 265 

17. Sand dunes along the Coliunbia River 269 

18. In a national forest 270 

19. Marking timber to be cut in a sale in a national forest in the Southwest . . 274 

20. Aforest fire 275 

21. Felling an Oregon cedar 280 

22. A saw mill 282 

23. Gathering rubber, Honduras 284 

24. Tapping for tiupentine 286 

25. A cattle ranch, Canada 291 

26. A dairy farm 293 

27. A cheese factory in Victoria, Australia 295 

28. The farm flock— White Plymouth Rocks 296 

29. Taking a large Chinook salmon from a seine in the Columbia River . . . 298 

30. Oystering in Chesapeake Bay 300 

31. Sheep in Tasmania 304 

32. Fur seals , 307 

33. Transportation in Mandalay 310 

34. Transportation by reindeer 311 

35. A moaem coUiery 315 

36. Production of coal in the United States 317 

37. Transportation of coal by lake vessel 318 

38. Petroleum well on fire 321 

39. World's production of petroleum 323 

40. Production of petroleum in the United States 323 

41. Quarrying limestone 327 

42. A brick-conveying machine 329 

43. Transporting iron ore 333 

44. Open-hearth steel furnace 334 

45. A mountain trail 348 

46. A New Jersey state road 349 

47. River transportation 355 

48. A lock in a canal. 356 

49. Harbor of New Orleans 362 

50. United States Army Air Service Airplane 366 

51. Map showing density of population m the United States 379 

52. Picking wild flowers in the White Mountains 383 

53. In New England 385 

54. Preparing dry fish in New England 387 

55. Gathering maple sap in New Endand 390 

56. The Hudson River near West Pomt 395 

57. Sky line of New York aty 399 

58. Busy section of Norfolk^ Virgmia 404 

59. Stone Mountain, Georgia 406 

60. Looking north on Broad Street toward City Hall, Philadelphia 409 

61. The Capitol, Washington. D. C 4il 

62. Blast furnace at Birmingnam, Alabama 415 

63. Cotton dock. New Orleans, Louisiana 417 



xviii List of Illustrations 

• 

64. Galveston sea wall 418 

66. On the southern slope of Grandfather Mountain 421 

66. Copper ingots ready for loading, Michigan 428 

67. EucUd Avenue, Cleveland's busiest street 432 

68. Chicago Stock Yard 434 

69. The Keokuk Project 441 

70. The Olive Street canyon, St. Louis 444 

71. A scene in Kansas City 446 

72. Flour mills in Minneapolis 448 

73. Ascene in Duluth 449 

74. Garden of the Gods, Colorado 453 

76. Denver, Colorado 468 

76. Business section of Salt Lake City 469 

77. In an Oregon forest 465 

78. A Columbia River log raft 466 

79. Mt. Rainier from Incuan Henry's Hunting Grounds 470 

80. A scene in Los Angeles 471 

81. The Los Angeles aqueduct 472 

82. The Golden Gate. San Francisco Bay 473 

83. Bird's-eye view oi Portland, Oregon 474 

84. End of Manufacturers' Building, Seattle 475 

85. Mt. Rainier from Paradise Valley. Nesqually Glacier in the foreground . 476 

86. A scene in Spokane 477 

87. On the coast of southern Alaska 481 

88. Juneau, Alaska, from the sea 485 

89. Tobacco field in Porto Rico 488 

90. Rainbow Falls near Hilo, Hawaii 491 

91. Cocoanut grove at Ramon, Zamboango, P. I 493 

92. Bird's-eye view of Panama Canal locks , . . . 496 

Maps 

Map showing ocean routes and cables. 368 

Physical map of the United States 372 

Precipitation map of the United States 374 

PoUtical map of the United States 378 

Map of the New England States 384 

Mapof NewYorkState 400 

Map of Atlantic Coastal Plain 404 

Map of the Southern States 412 

Map of the East Central States 432 

Map of the West Central States 448 

Map of the Rocky Mountain and Plateau States 452 

Map of the Pacific Coast States 460 

Map of Alaska 484 

Map of Porto Rico 486 

Map of Hawaiian Islands 490 

Map of Philippine Islands 492 

Map of Panama Canal Zone 496 



^ m •» « 

* ^ ^. ^ 



.iv-**"',- *•• 



GEOGRAPHY 

CHAPTER I 

Man and His Physical Environment 

Man and Climate. — ^The average citizen of the Sahara cannot be 
reached by mail, telegraph nor telephone. Neither train, trolley, 
auto nor carriage will carry one to his residence. His home is one of a 
collection of similar buildings hidden by groves of date palms, among 
which narrow paths wind, and small streams of water flow. Outside 
the groves there are fields of barley and wheat, and gardens where 
vegetables and fruits are grown. 

The houses are in most cases constructed of stones, sim-dried 
bricks or skins, making homes which are usually dark, poorly ven- 
tilated and uninviting. There is little furniture. Cooking is gen- 
erally done over an open fire, and the smoke escapes as best it can. 
If a drink of water is desired, it is obtained from a nearby well or 
from a spring instead of from a faucet. 

When a Saharan wishes to make a journey he mounts a camel, 
and in company with others similarly mounted, rides away. At once 
he passes from the shade of the date palms to the glare of the desert. 
Day after day and week after week the sunshine beats down on the 
almost waterless wastes of sand and rock. The earth is hot to the 
touch. The wind shifts the sand dunes as it does snow drifts in cold 
regions, and at times drives the sand grains against the hands and face 
with cutting force. The glare of the sunlight is painful,*^ and the eye 
longs for the restful green of vegetation. In a journey of hundreds 
of miles neither lake, stream, forest nor meadow might be seen. 
Except on the occasional oasis there is no tilled land, for only in such 
a situation is water to be found. 

In most parts of the Sahara the average annual rainfall is less than 
10 inches, and in many places it is practically nothing. Where 
mountains rise high enough to chill the atmosphere to the condensa- 
tion point, there is some rainfall. Obviously the Sahara can support 
but a small population, and this is distributed in accordance with the 
water supply. 

1 



2 : ••• . '.- ■.:•': -..■Geography 

Upbb-sOBftt'of ^^ oaJies-.bhere are towns of considerable size. 
Caravan routes connect the towns, the chief business of which is the 
trade in dates. As the camel can live for several days without water 
and with very little food, it is the chief means of travel and of trajis- 
portation. Absence of timber explains why the houses are usually 
constructed of stones, sun-dried bricks or skins. The high tem- 



perature and abundant sunshine make it possible to grow the date, 
and the date industry is therefore the chief occupation of the people. 
Lack of means of easy communication with the outside world, as well 
aa the poverty of many of the people, have resulted in the retention 
of primitive ways of living. 

The one condition which more than any other restricts settlement 
and influences the lives of the people on the Sahara is climate, or to 



Man and His Physical Environment 3 

be more exact, the lack of rainfall. Most of the soil is fertile, but 
except in favored localities Nature withholds the rain without which 
the earth cannot jdeld her fruits. Similar conditions of climate and 
of life exist in much of Arabia and Australia, and in smaller areas in 
many lands. 

Greenland differs from the Sahara in being a cold desert. The 
people are isolated, and their Uves are strikingly dominated by 
Nature. With the exception of a narrow coastal strip, the land is 
covered with snow and ice at all seasons of the year. This makes 
agriculture impossible. The food of the native inhabitants, except 
those who come in contact with white men,. is therefore obtained 
from the animals which live upon the island and in the surrounding 
waters. The climatic conditions render forests impossible. As a 
result, the dwelUngs are constructed of the most available materials-^ 
snow and ice in the winter, and skins in the summer. 

The Eskimos who Uve near the coast, and who therefore carry on 
a trade with the white men, secure clothing and other articles from 
them. The people who live in the interior are dressed in the furs and 
skins of animals. Native tools are made from bones and stones, and 
hoUowed-out rocks, in which the oil of the seal or walrus is burned, 
serve as lamps and stoves. 

Railroads are unknown, and as the country affords no pasturage, 
there are no horses or cattle. The dog, which can subsist upon a meat 
diet^ furnishes the only means of transportation by land, other than 
walking. Although the area of Greenland is about the same as the 
combined areas of all of the states east of the Mississippi river, the 
total population is less than 20,000. 

The physical environment of the Eskimo makes a diversity of 
occupation impossible. There is practically no such thing as a divi- 
sion of labor, and therefore none of the industrial problems so impor- 
tant in most parts of the world. House and boat building, hunting, 
fishing, tailoring, and the manufacture of a few crude articles are 
carried on by each family. 

There are great land areas surrounding each pole, and there are 
smaller areas at high altitudes in many parts of the world, where there 
is little or no human life. As in the Sahara, it is climate which accounts 
for the sparse population, but the controlling factor is low tempera- 
ture rather than lack of precipitation. 

In the humid parts of the tropical zone Nature is so lavish that man 
does not need to struggle to secure a Uving. Wild and cultivated 
products of the soil furnish an abundance of food. Because of the 



high temperature, the requirements as to clothing and shelter are 
limited, and again the needs are met by the immediate enviromnent. 
As v^etation grows at all seasons there is no period for which pro- 



L_.. 



Peary's ship "Roosevelt" ieebouod. 



vision must be made in advance. These conditions do not develop 
thrift; in fact a hot and humid climate tends to foster indolence. This 
is illustrated on the delta of the Ganges, on the lowland areas of the 
Philippine Islands, in the East and West Indies] on the Atlantic 
coastal plain of Mexico and in other similar situations. 



Man and His Physical Environment 5 

The climatic conditions which are most encouraging to prc^jess 
exist in the middle portions of the temperate zones. In these areas 
there is a long period during which vegetation does not grow. As a 
result of this, man must each year accumulate a surplus of the neces- 
sities of life in order that his needs may be met during the cold 
season. Through the exercise of reasonable foresight and energy 
some leisure is available. As *moderately cold climate acts as a tonic, 
the leisure is used to advanttige, and as a result, we have under these 
chmatic conditions the most rapid human progress. . 



In some areas climate exerts s special influence during a part of 

the year. Northern Italy, the southeastern coast of France, Florida 
and California attract large niunbers of winter residents. Favor- 
able summer climate is an important reason why Switzerland, the 
White Mountains, th^ Berkshire Hills and Adirondacks have large 
populations at that season. In the sections mentioned, there are 
cities and towns the interests of which are very largely based upon the 
tourist business. 

No other physical condition exerts so great an influence upon 
human affairs as does climate. There is the most vital relationship 



6 Geography 

between climate and the products of the soil. Directly or indirectly 
man depends upon plants for his food, clothing, and a large number of 
other things. We can in a measure control many of the forms and the 
forces of nature, but it is not within our power to modify climate. 

Man and Topography. — ^Topography exercises a powerful influence 
in promoting or retarding the industrial and commercial development 
of a region. Surface features, by their ruggednessj often make the 
extensive development of agriculture, the basal industry, impossible. 
.There are many illustrations of this. The combined area of the 
New England states is nearly twice that of the state of Indiana, 
yet the farm products of the latter are more valuable than are 
those of the former. Indiana produces more com, wheat and oats 
than all of the New England states combined. The topography 
of West Virginia, eastern Kentucky and Tennessee, the western part 
pf the Carolinas, northern Georgia and Alabama discourages exten- 
sive agriculture. Norway is essentially a land of mountains, and as a 
result less than five per cent, of her area is cultivated. Japan is 
for the most part a mountainous land, where we find only about 
ten per cent, of the area tilled. In Switzerland and in parts of 
Austria, agriculture is carried on under great difiiculties because of 
the broken surface. Along the Rhine the steep hills are terraced and 
covered with vineyards. A rugged topography also has the effect of 
lessening the machinery employed on the farm. 

The states in the central part of our country have a topography 
highly favorable to the development of agriculture. This has had its 
effect in causing this section to become the granary of the United 
States. Russia, partly because of the levelness of surface, is essentially 
an agricultural country. More than three-fourths of her people live 
in the country, and her exports are very largely the products of the 
soil. France, with her long plain sloping gently to the westward, has 
fifty-five per cent, of her total area under cultivation. Hungary, 
Argentina, the great plains of China, and the plains of India are very 
largely agricultural. 

Although the surface of New England is unfavorable to farming it 
promotes manufacturing. The steep slopes, as well as the glacier- 
filled valleys, have given rise to swift streams. These, even in early 
days, were turned to account in the sawing of lumber, the grinding of 
grist, and the manufacture of cotton. The Merrimac, although a 
stream of inconsiderable size, produces a vast amount of power. 
On this river we find the manufacturing centers of Haverhill, Law- 
rence, Lowell, Nashua, Manchester and Concord. Electric energy 



Man and His Physical Environment 7 

in the form of both light and power is also extensively developed in 
New England, at Niagara Falls, in our southern uplands, at Keokuk, 
Iowa, and on the Pacific Coast. 

Because of great relief and abundant precipitation Norway, 
Sweden and Switzerland are richly endowed with water power. It 
has been estimated that from the streams of Norway 5,500,000 horse 
power can be developed. Norway is using a large amount of hydro- 
electric energy in the fixation of nitrogen. 

From the streams of Switzerland it is possible to develop about 
2,000,000 horse power. More than twenty-five per cent, of this 
amount is being utilized. During the summer the streams are in full 
flood because of the melting of the snows and glaciers. Much power 
is used in operating mountain railways. 

The World War stimulated the development of water power in 
European countries. In the neighborhood of Grenoble, France, there 
is much activity along this line. The same is true of Barcelona, 
Spain, and of the Piedmont section of Italy. Although Great Britain 
is so rich in coal^ increased^^ttention is being given to the develop- 
ment of water power. 

A mountainous surface restricts trade and travel because it in- 
creases the cost of road building and operation. In rugged areas 
roads follow the river valleys, and passes play an important part in 
guiding routes. In addition to the great lift, there is the cost of rock 
blasting, tunneling, and the construction of many bridges. Sharp 
curves help to reduce the running time, .^nd this means added cost. 

The Pyrenees rise along the boundary between Spain and France 
to the maximum height of 11,000 feet. So effectually do these moun- 
tains act as a barrier to commerce between these nations that no rail- 
road crosses them. The only railroads connecting Spain and France 
were built around the east and west ends of the mountains. At the 
present time (1929) there are three lines under construction each of 
which will cross the Pyrenees. 

The republic of Switzerland, surrounded by mountains, was at a 
great disadvantage both industrially and commercially until the 
tunnels connecting it with other countries were built. The St. 
Gothard tunnel, nine and a half miles in length, affords a ready means 
of connecting Switzerland with Italy. By means of this passageway 
through the lofty mountain wall, raw silk and other commodities 
are brought in from Italy and converted into finished products. The 
Simplon tunnel places Switzerland in connection with Paris and 
France by the way of the Rh6ne valley and the "Burgundy gate.'' 



8 GEoaaAPHT 

The Engleburg tunnel puts Switzerland in connection with the great 
city of -Vienna to the advantage of both. 

The Himalayas, the most lofty mountain barrier on the face of 
the earth, rise on the north of India. Here Mt. Everest lifts his head 
crowned with everlasting snows to a height of 29,000 feet, and there 
are many other peaks in the vicinity more than 20,000 feet in altitude. 
The average height of the passes is greater than that of most peaks 
in the Rocky Mountains and they are generally occupied by great 
^aciera. No railroad connects India's 300,000,000 inhabitants with 



the vast Chinese Republic lying to the northeast. No wagon roads 
are built over the " abode of snow." With the greatest difficulty 
yaks and porters toil up the mountain sides and over the glacier-filled 
passes, thus making possible a very uiconsiderable trade by land 
between the two most populous nations of the earth. 

In mountainous regions the influence of topography upon the 
dire<Aion which trade and communication take, as well as upon their 
extent, is marked. In the central part of our country, roads of all 
kinds are built with little regard to the topography. In the more 
rugged sections of the Unit.ed States lines of travel almost invari- 
ably follow the valleys. A study of topographic maps represent;- 
ing level and mountainous areas will bring out these points. 



Man and His Physical Environment 9 

On the other hand, if a mountainous country has attractive 
scenery or great mineral wealth, it devdops transportation faciUties. 
The wonderful scenery of Switzerland has led to the building of car- 
riage roads and railroads, and to the erection of many hotels. Auto 
roads are being made in all of the scenic parts of our country in order 
to make their beailties easily accessible. 

It is upon the plains that the dense populations of the world are 
generally found. In these situations, as has been stated, leyelness 
favors agriculture, and travel and transportation. The soil is usually 
deep and fertile, being in large part the result of long-continued waste 
of higher levels. Streams, in many cases, afford cheap transportation 
for people and products, as well as water for irrigation. In temperate 
latitudes the most desirable climatic conditions exist upon the low- 
lands. The plains of China, western Europe, Argentina, and our 
Atlantic Coastal Plain are illustrations. 

Man and the Soil. — Directly and indirectly climate is the chief 
factor influencing agriculture. As has been shown, topography also 
exercises a strong control. The density of rural populations, the value 
of the land, the character and value of the crop, the roads, and social 
development generally, bear a definite relationship to the nature of 
the soil. 

As a rule soils are productive where favorable climatic conditions 
obtain. In some areas soils are deficient in some important elemert or 
contain something injurious to most crops, as alkali. The nature of 
the soil, if residual, depends upon the underlying rock. A soil com- 
posed of disintegrated limestone is usually more fertile than one com- 
posed of decayed sandstone. This is because the former as a rule 
contains more mineral plant food than does the latter. Lime increases 
the ability of the soil to hold water and it prevents souring of the soil. 
Whitbeck' has shown that in Wisconsin farm values are greater in 
the areas of limestone soils than in those of sandstone soils. This is 
true in Kentucky, in the Gulf Plains, and elsewhere. 

From New Jersey to Georgia the seaward portion of the Atlantic 
Coastal Plain is, as a rule, marshy or composed of a light sandy soil. 
In this area farm values are less than they are in the section to the 
westward. In more than a dozen counties along the coast of Georgia 
the value of the farm land was in 1910 less than $10 per acre. In the 
section immediately adjacent, values ranged from $10 to $25 per acre. 

* Whitbeck,. Ray Hughes: *The Geography and Industries of Wisconsin," 
pp. 37, 38. 



10 Geography 

The soils of southeastern Illinois are not nearly so fertile as are those 
of the central part of the state. In the central part the soil is deep, 
loose, well-drained and highly fertile. In this section the valufe of the 
farm land ranged from $100 to $125 per acre, but in the southeastern 
part the value was from $25 to $50 per acre in 1910. 

The best agricultural section of England is the southeastern part. 
There the soil is deep and fertile, formed by the decay of calcareous 
rocks. Agriculture is not nearly so highly developed on the sandy 
soils bordering the Bay of Biscay as it is in the western and northern 
parts of Prance. The ''black earth" region of European Russia is 
highly fertile and supports a large population. Illustrations might 
be multiplied. 

There is a close relationship between the character of the soil and 
the crops which will do best in it. Our government is making a soil 
survey, the results of which show the depth of the soil, its relation to 
water and temperature, and its composition. Farmers may therefore 
plant the crops best suited to the given areas. This is one of the many 
evidences that agriculture is a science, and that man is recognizing 
his relationship to his environment. 

Man and Rivers. — Before the days of railroads, rivers played an 
important part in the development of the lands because many of the 
streams afforded an easy and a cheap means of transporting people and 
products. The St. Lawrence, Hudson, Mississippi, Amazon, Parana, 
Seine, Rhine and Danube are illustrations. 

Although the railroads have taken from the rivers much of their 
former importance as trade routes, the amount of freight yet shipped 
on streams is, in the aggregate, very large. The commodities handled 
are chiefly the bulky and non-perishable ones. All of the rivers men- 
tioned above, as well as many others, bear a considerable commerce 
even today. 

The diversion of stream water has converted desert areas into 
regions of great productiveness where prosperous communities live 
happy lives. Egypt has for many centuries been called the ''gift of 
the Nile," because without the life-giving waters of this* stream 
Egypt would be what the land but a few miles on each side of the 
river is — a desert. In northwestern India irrigation has reclaimed 
large areas. Although millions have been spent upon irrigation pro- 
jects in the United States, the work is yet in its infancy. In the 
arid portions of our western states there is much land which in its 
natural condition was unproductive, but which because of irriga- 
tion now yields large crops. 



Man and His Physical Environment 11 

Little by little for thousands of years man has been learning to 
utilize the forces of nature, thus lighteniug his physical burdens, and 
adding to hia comfort, pleasure, wealth and us^ulness. For untold 
centuries the force of falling water was expended solely upon the soil 
and the rocks .with which it came in contact. Thus were fashioned 
many of our beautiful waterfalls, gorges and canyons. Man has now 
harnessed this power, and at his bidding it grinds his grain, saws hia 
lumber, operates the .machinery ip his factories, propels his cars and 
illuminates'his cities. 



Fio. 5.— RoOHOVelt Dun. Salt River. Arbons. (U. S. {Uclsmstion Service.) 

Man and Minerals. — Long before the beginnmg of the Christian 
Era the Phcenieians braved the perils of the sea in order to secure tin 
from the mines in the Cornish Peninsula. The mineral wealth of 
Peru and Mexico led the Spanish to make extensive sea voyages, and 
in more recent years the discovery of mineral wealth has led to large 
movements of population. 

The rank of Great Britain as an industrial and commercial nation, 
as a naval and as a great world-power, is due in large measure to her 
vast stores of coal and iron. Not only are these deposits close to- 
gether, but they are close to the sea-coast. It is the coal of England 
which indirectly is exchanged for raw cotton, wool, wheat, meats, 



12 Geography 

lumber, fruits and other ccnnmodities. Owing to the proximity of 
coal and iron the '*Black Coimtry" is a beehive of industry, where 
cotton and woolen goods, boots and shoes, cutlery, machinery and a 
host of other things are manufactured. 

Italy, on the other hand, owing to her geology, is very deficient in 
minerals. She has, however, a very large supply of one mineral — sul- 
phur. Sicily is the chief source of supply, producing about 500,000 tons 
annually. While lack of mineral wealth hinders the industrial devel- 
opment of Italy, it must not be supposed that this is the only cause. 

Belgium and France have large deposits of coal and iron. The 
mines of Belgium and northeastern France were captured by the 
• Germans early in the World War and held until its close. This 
was a serious loss to the Allies. Lyons, St. Etienne, Paris, Lille, 
Roubaix, Namur and Lidge are cities the industrial importance of 
which is in part due to the proximity of coal and iron. The Rhine 
Valley is one of the great coal and iron producing sections of 
Germany, and it also is a great industrial district. 

The United States is the most favored of all nations with respect 
to mineral wealth. The value of our mineral products is approxi- 
mately equal to the mineral wealth of all other nations combined. 
This is the more important as our coal and iron deposits often occur 
close together, thus making manufacturing much less expensive than 
it otherwise would be. Our enormous mineral wealth has led to a 
great industrial development, promoted the construction of railroads, 
built up a large lake commerce and brought into existence many 
towns and cities. 

Pennsylvania, West Virginia, northern Alabama and other areas 
in our country are rich in coal and iron deposits. The "New South'' 
owes its progress in no small degree to the existence of its coal and iron 
now extensively used in manufacturing. < 

The discovery of gold in California was the cause of a most remark- 
able influx of population and the rapid development of the state in 
pre-agricultural days. Because of h6r rapid growth in population, 
California was admitted to the Union as a state rather than as a 
territory. The gold of California played a part also in leading to the 
early construction of the first trans-continental railroad. 

The presence of large quantities of building stone, if situated near 
great centers of population, furnishes employment to thousands of 
men, and investment for large sums of money. The marble quarries 
of Vermont and the granite quarries of Maine and Massachusetts are 
illustrations. The Silurian limestone which underlies much of the 



Man and His Physical Environment 13 

central part of the Mississippi basin has led to the development of 
extensive quarries at Joliet and Lemont, Illinois, and has given the 
nickname of ' 'Stone City'' to the former. 

The great deposits of clay in the vicinity of Chicago and Milwaukee 
are of much importance to those cities. Milwaukee pressed bricks are 
shipped to many points. Good pottery-clays have led to the manu-: 
facture of world famous pottery and porcelain at East Liverpool, Ohio, 
Trenton, New Jersey, Sevres and Limoges, France, and other places. 

One of the very remarkable results of mineral deposits upon 
human life is seen in Australia. More than 300 miles from the 
western coast of this continent, in. the midst of a forbidding desert, 
thriving cities have been built. In order to make this possible a 
pipe line nearly 300 miles long and about three feet in diameter was 
laid. This conveys water to some fifty towns, most of the inhabitants 
of which are directly or indirectly interested in gold mining. 

Rich deposits of iron in the Lake Superior region, transportation 
by the lakes, extensive beds of coal and limestone in the vicinity of 
the head of Lake Michigan, and a great demand for the articles into 
the construction of which iron and steel enter, led to the creation of a 
town upon the sand du»«s of northern Indiana. Here on the^ore of 
Lake Michigan tlie raw "products can be cheaply assembled, and from 
here this manufactured iron and steel can be cheaply distributed. 
The busy city of Gary, with its man-made harbor, came into exist- 
ence because of the iron and steel industry, and is a wonderful human 
response to a combination of geographic conditions. 

Man and the Coast. — Owing to the configuration of the British 
Isles no part of them is far removed from the ocean. Arms of the sea 
penetrate the land from all sides. This has placed a large part of the 
population in close proximity to the water. Fishing, commerce and 
numerous seaports are the natural results. The longest land haul, 
whether for exports or imports, is less than 100 miles. 

Because of the ruggedness of the topography of Norway, the sup- 
port of the people comes in large measure from the ocean. Most of 
the population is situated cjose to the sea. The towns and villages 
are located at the heads of the fiords, and the best means of communi- 
cation between them is by water. As one result of these conditions, 
Norway furnishes many seamen who help to operate the merchant 
marine of other nations. 

Irregular coast lines, when well populated or when supporting 
considerable conunerce, must be protected. The protection is expen- 
sive. Along all such coasts lighthousjes, buoys, bells and life-saving 



14 Geoorapht 

stations are maintained. Harbors are carefully charted and exact 
depths are recorded. Tide tables are published and storm warnings 
issued for the benefit of mariners. Our Atlantic coast and the coast of 
western Europe are excellent illustrations. 

A very regular coast line, such as that of Africa, retards the devel- 
opment of commerce. The coast of Peru and the northern coast of 
Chile are very deficient in harbors and ocean cranmerce is therefore 
carried on at a great disadvant^e. 

Where harbors are not sufficiently protected naturally, break- 



waters are often constructed at great cost. Lack of area and depth 
are remedied by dredging. 

Man and Forests. — There are large areas in the tropical parts of 
Africa and South America where, owing to abundant precipitation 
and high temperature, there ia a dense forest growth. The trees grow 
80 close together that there is a perpetual twil^ht in the forests. A 
jungle of smaller forms of tropical vegetation occupies the space 
between the trees, and creepers add to the difficulty in traveling. 
These forests are inhabited but the population is not dense. To clear 
the land is an undertaking of great magnitude, and it is very difficult 
to keep it cleared because of the rapid growth of vegetation. 

The people in these forests have not developed agriculture exten- 



Man and His Physical Environmknt 



sively. Manufacturing and commerce are relatively unimportant. 
As a rule the inhabitants have only temporary dwellings and are quite 
nomadic in their habits. The natives in the tropical forests of South 
America, Africa and New Guinea are illustrations. 

Temperate latitude forests, although not so dense as those in 



16 Geography 

tropical areas, discourage settlement. There are great forest belts in 
Siberia and Canada, and partly because of this, the population in these 
areas is sparse. The northern sections of Maine, Minnesota, Wiscon- 
sin and Michigan illustrate the same point. The dense forests in the 
northwestern part of California and in parts of western Washington 
and Oregon are in a measure responsible for sparse population . In these , 
and in many other temperate latitude forests, the main industry is lum- 
bering and other occupations growing out of the products of the forests . 

MAN^S DEPENDENCE , ^ ^ 

The works of man are marvelous. No one can measure, his grower 
or his possibilities, yet he is by no means independent of "^^ nature. 
His progress is more or less definitely shaped and guided by the 
physical conditions by which he is surrounded. In the childhood of the 
race man accepted the conditions which Nature imposed upon him, 
though in some cases he offered sacrifices hoping to appease her 
anger, or to secure larger benefits from her. Today, as has been indi- 
cated, man modifies his physical environment, and often overcomes 
unfavorable conditions. He can utilize and distribute, but he cannot 
create the forces and the richiGs of nature. ' 

In a direct sense human beings are not so dependent upon nature 
now as they were formerly, but indirectly they are more dependent. 
When the writer's parents were children, people living in the country 
produced practically everything required for their own use. Grains, 
vegetables, fruits, fneats aM fibers were produced upon the farmg. 
The making of butter, cheese, clothing, shoes, soap and many other 
things were household industries; The ordinary farmer in many cases 
built his own house. V , . , 

Today, owing to speciafeation of labor, household industries have 
practically vanished ffpm oiir country. Many farmers buy much of 
their own food, and clbtjiing ig. seldom made in the home. In the mills 
and factories each person perfonAs some limited line of work. 

Before the days of extensive commerce people depended very 
largely upon the resources of their own localities. Today the ordinary 
family in any highly civilized country depends upon many parts of 
the world for the articles which are served at an average meal. There 
is the same dependence upon the outside world for all of the necessi- 
ties and luxuries of life. 

This makes it evident that the indirect dependence of man upon 
nature is very great. A partial failure of the cotton crop in the 
United States is seriously felt in many distant countries. A drought 



Man and His Physical Environment 17 

which greatly reduces the exportation of wheat by any one of the 
great wheat exporting countries, increases the cost of bread in the 
British Isles. If an early frost largely lessens the yield of com in the 
United States, the price of pork advances at home and abroad, for 
our ' 'com belt " is the greatest hog raising region in the world. When 
hurricanes devastate the sugar plantations in Cuba, the cost of sugar 
to American housewives is increased, because we import Cuban 
sugar extensively. Many illustrations of this kind might be given. 
Climatic conditions, topography, soil, streams, forests, mineral 
wealth, shore lines — ^these constitute the physical environment of 
man. The science of geography deals with the origin and the evolu- 
tion of this environment and with the relations between it and human 
life. It is therefore a subject of the deepest interest and the greatest 
importance. Its pursuit leads the student into every part of the world, 
and into countless activities of human life. Without a knowledge of 
geography neither history nor the events of the day can be correctly 
interpreted. It makes possible a much greater enjoyment of the 
forms and forces of nature than could be had otherwise. In a word, the 
pur]^ose of geography is to give its students a better understanding 
of ' 'the earth as the home of man. " 

STUDIES. 

Make a careful study of the influences of geographic environment in your 
own state or locality. What factors are the most important? 

REFERENCES. 

DoDOE, Richard E. : * 'Man and His Geographic Environment. *' — Jour, of Geog.f 

vol. viii, p. 179. 
Faiborieve, James: "Geography and World Power." 
Freeman, E. A. : ' 'Historical Geography of Europe. " 
George, H. B.: ''The Relations of Geography and History/ 
GooDE, J. Paul: "The Human Response to the Physical Environment." — Jour. 

of Geog.y vol. iii, p. 333. 
Herbertson, a. J. AND F. D.: "Man and His Work.'* 
KiRCHHOPp, Alfred : "Man and Earth." 
Lyde, L. W.: "Man in Many Lands." 
Semple, Ellen C: "Influences of Geographic Environment." 



CHAPTER II 
The Earth and Its Neighbors 

THE EARTH 

Form of the Earth. — The discovery of America by Columbus was 
nearly prevented by the fact that his sailors beUeved the earth to be 
flat, and that if they persisted in their westward journey, their ships 
would in time plunge over the supposed edge of the earth. So fearful 
were the sailors that this would happen, that they implored their 
commander to turn back toward Europe, and they finally threatened 
to put him in chains unless he would do so. But the faith and deter- 
mination of the leader triumphed. 

This voyage did not prove the earth to be a sphere, but it helped 
to free men's minds from some of the superstitions of the time, and it 
gave them more confidence in sailing the seas. People have since 
traveled around the world along many different lines, and everywhere 
its surface has been found to be curved. Long before the days of 
Columbus there were those who believed the earth to be spherical. 
Indeed, this theory was advanced by Pythagoras (582-507 b. c), but 
it was not generally accepted for 2000 years. If this seems to you a 
remarkable circumstance, consider what you have actually observed 
which wouldlead you to conclude that the form of the earth is that of 
a sphere. 

Scientists have actually measured the diameters of the earth, and 
the measurements show the equatorial diameter to be 7926.6 miles 
and the polar diameter 7899.6 miles. We see from this that the earth 
is practically a sphere. The variation • from this form is so slight 
that in the case of a two-foot globe it could not be detected by the 
unaided eye. 

When' the shadow of the earth is thrown upon the moon an eclipse 
of the latter occurs. Eclipses of the moon have taken place with the 
earth in many different positions but the shadow cast by the earth has 
in all cases been a circle. This may be taken as strong evidence that 
the earth is substantially spherical. 

If a person makes a long journey in a north or south direction, 

stars with which he is not familiar appear and rise higher and higher 

as he continues his journey, while the ones with which he is familiar 

in his home locality are correspondingly depressed. With a very 

18 



The Earth and Its Neighbors 19 

slight variation due to the flattening of the earth in polar regions, 
stars appear to rise or fall 1° to each 69.17 miles traveled. This shows 
that the earth is practically a sphere, and at the same time it furnishes 
a means of measuring the polar circumference of the earth. 

The weight of a body is the measure of the attraction between the 
earth and that body. The nearer a body upon the surface of the earth 
is to the center the greater the attraction, hence the greater the weight. 
The weight of a body is conditioned by another fact. Centrifugal 
force, which varies from zero at the poles to a maximum at the 
equator, reduces the force of gravity, hence it reduces the weight. 

The weight of a body at the equator, as compared with its weight 
at either pole, is reduced 5^ because of increased distance from the 
center of the earth, and ^j-^ because of centrifugal force. The total 
reduction amounts to ^-Jr ^f ^he whole. A quantity of flour which 
would weigh one ton at the north pole would weigh, only about ten 
pounds less at the equator. 

We find in this a proof that the form of the earth varies but 
sUghtly from that of a sphere, and also an exceedingly inportant 
result of the form of the earth. 

Latitude and Longitude. — Latitude is distance north or south of 
the equator and is therefore measured along north to south lines. 
The word latitude is from latiLSf meaning wide. Longitude is distance 
east or west of some specified meridian; unless otherwise stated, the 
meridian which passes through Greenwich, England. Longitude is 
measured along east to west lines. The word longitude is derived from 
longusy meaning long. The people who first applied the terms latitude 
and longitude believed the greatest extent of the earth to be from east 
to west. Degrees of latitude are practically the same in length, but 
degrees of longitude are not. 

Rotation. — The earth rotates from west to east, which causes the 
sun and the stars to appear to revolve in the opposite direction. The 
period of the earth's rotation as measured by the transit of a star, 
which is the interval between two successive movements of a particular 
star across a given meridian, is 23 hours, 56 minutes, 4 seconds. 

All points upon the earth's surface complete a rotation in this 
period of time, but they rotate at very different rates. The top of 
Eiffel Tower rotates more rapidly than does the base, hence a ball 
dropped from the top of the tower, and on the east side of it, should 
strike the ground to the east of the base of the tower. It is very 
difficult to verify this by experiment, however. 

Rotation gives a right-hand deflection to bodies moving over the 



20 Geography 

earth's surface in the northern hemisphere, and a left-hand deflection in 
the southern hemisphere. Thus the direction in which winds and ocean 
currents move is influenced by the rotation of the earth. North or south 
flowing rivers wear their right hand banks more if in the northern 
hemisphere, and their left hand banks more if in the southern hemi- 
sphere. The law relating to this deflection is known as FerreFs Law. 

As a result of rotation, the earth turns now one face and now 
another toward the sun, giving us our succession of day and night. 
Were the earth stationary, one-half of its surface would never receive 
sunshine, and would therefore be incapable of sustaining life. Were 
the period of rotation increased or diminished, the length of our day 
and night would be changed accordingly. 

Sun time, or solar time, is the same at all points on a given meridian 
at any particular instant, but at no two points on a given parallel is 
sun time the same at a specified instant. This is a very important 
result of rotation. Since the earth rotates eastward (anti-clockwise), 
time travels westward, or clockwise. 

Because a point on the earth's surface rotates through 360° in 
twenty-four hours, it rotates through 15° in one hour. When it is 
noon at New York it is midnight on the meridian exactly opposite 
New York. It is evident when we consider the whole suface of the 
earth that there are two days in operation at the same time. 

Let us start from New York at six o'clock in the morning on a trip 
around the world following a parallel and carrying correct time accord- 
ing to the sun at New York. When we have traveled 15° west we 
find that our time is one hour fast according to the sun, for we are 
carrying New York time. We therefore set our time back one hour, 
which is an apparent loss of this length of time. For each 15° of longi- 
tude traveled, this process must be repeated. In traveling the 360° 
in the circumference of the earth there would be an apparent loss of 
twenty-four hours, or one day. If these changes were not made, we 
should find upon reaching home that our day and date were one behind 
those in force there. If we were to travel eastward around the world 
we would apparently gain a day. Travelers used to have this very 
experience. 

International Date Line. — ^To avoid such confusion of dayB and 
dates, what is known as the International Date Line has been agreed 
upon. Figure 8 shows that this is practically the 180th meridian. All 
dajrs and dates are thought of as beginning at this line at midnight 
and traveling west. A given day encircles the earth in twenty-four 
hours and comes to a close at midnight at the Date Line. 



The Earth and Its Neighbors 21 

Almost exactly twenty-four hours after the day begins at the 
Date Liney it begins at the meridian 1° east of that line. Here, as 
elsewhere, the day will last for twenty-four hours. Hence a given day 
is in operation forty-eight hours. Upon crossing the Date Line sailing 
west, the day of the week and the date of the month are each advanced 
one but the time of the day is unchanged. The opposite change is 
made upon crossing the line sailing east. Thus the whole apparent 
gain or loss resulting from a trip around the world is corrected at once. 

It is obvious that this change of day and date should be made as 
far from land as possible. On this account the 180th meridian is a 
very advantageous one. In order that all of Russia may have the 
same date, the Date Line swings about eleven degrees east of the 
180th meridian so as to clear Cape Deshnef . In the neighborhood of 
the Aleutian Islands the line swings west of the 180th meridian to give 
to the Aleutian Islands the same date as is in force in the United 
States. The departure of the Date Line from its theoretical position 
east of Australia gives to the Fiji Islands, New Zealand and Chatham 
Island the same date. If the International Date Line and the 180th 
meridian absolutely coincided, a given day could be in operation but 
forty-eight hours. Fig. 8 shows that Cape Deshnef, latitude 169° 
west, and Attn Island, latitude 173° east, are points in the Date Line. 
When January 1st of any given year was just beginning at Attn Island, 
it was one hour and twelve minutes old at Cape Deshnef. When the 
day came to a close at Attn Island, it was twenty-five hours and 
twelve minutes after it began at Cape Deshnef, When the day was 
just closing at Attn Island, it was just beginning at a point imme- 
diately east of it. The day of course lasted twenty-four hours at this 
point. There is therefore a period of forty-nine hours and twelve 
minutes during which the same day is in force upon some part of the 
surface of the earth. 

Standard Time. — ^We have seen that solar time differs at all points 
on a parallel circle. It is evident that it would be exceedingly con- 
fusing to operate trains or to keep appointments if each town in the 
United States did business according to local solar time. And even 
this arrangement would not take into account the vast rural areas. 
It was not until 1883, however, that a standard system of time was 
adopted in the United States. The establishing of the system was the 
work of the railroads, but the credit for suggesting the matter seems to 
belong to Professor Cleveland Abbe, who, as Chief of the Weather 
Bureau, had foimd great difficulty in securing simultaneous observa- 
tions of weather conditions in different parts of the country. 



22 



Geocraphy 



The surface of the United States has been divided into four north 
to south belts, each theoretically 15° in width. At any instant all 
points within a given Standard Time Belt have the same standard 
time. Time within the belt is fixed by the time of a meridian passing 
approximate]^ through the center of the belt. When it is noon by the 




4« . 



Fig. 8. — International date line. 

sun on the 75th meridian, it is noon by standard time at all points in 
the Eastern Time Belt. Central Time is governed by the 90th 
meridian, Rocky Mountain Time by the 105th meridian, and Pacific 
Time by the 120th meridian. Thus when it is noon in New York, it is 
nine o'clock in the morning in San Francisco. 

The boundary lines of the belts are irregular and are drawn to suit 



The Earth and Its Neighbors 



23 



c 

CO 

■| 
QC 

» 

o 
a. 

SB 

a. 
3 

to 

C 

CD 




24 Geography 

the convenience of the railroads. The lines, usually pass through towns 
which are the ends of divisions where train crews are changed. Upon 
crossing a boundary line, time is put back one hour if traveling west- 
ward, ahead one hour if traveling eastward. No change is made in 
day or date except at or near midnight. 

On May 1, 1914, Cleveland, which had previously been in the 
Central Time Belt, adopted Eastern Time as its standard. Standard 
time is in vogue in Europe, that continent having three time belts. 
It was adopted by Brazil on January 1, 1914, the republic being 
divided into four time belts. 

The invention of the telegraph made it possible to compare and 
correct time in areas widely separated. For about fifty years time has 
daily at noon been telegraphed from Washington, D. C, to points 
east of the Rocky Mountains and from San Francisco to points in 
the western part of our country. 

Revolution. — ^We speak of certain persons as being travelers, but 
as you have seen, all of the inhabitants of the earth are daily carried 
thousands of miles as a result of about 25,000 miles rotation of the 
earth. While we are making this daily journey, we are performing a 
part of a marvelous annual trip around the* sun. The distance 
covered by this yearly journey is 584,000,000 miles, the time is 
three hundred and sixty-five days, five hours, forty-eight minutes, 
forty-five seconds, and the average rate is a little more than 1000 
miles per minute. 

This movement of the earth is known as revolution. All of the 
planets revolve about the sun, but their periods of revolution vary 
greatly. The elliptical path which the earth follows in making its 
annual journey is known as the earth's orbit. The mean distance of 
the earth from the sun is approximately 93,000,000 miles, and the 
difference between the maximum and the minimum distance is only 
about 3,000,000 miles. This difference is so slight relativelyy only 
about one-thirtieth of the mean distance, that in diagrammatic repre- 
sentations of the orbit a circle is usually employed. 

.Change of Seasons. — One of the most wonderful of our experiences 
is the change of seasons, due to revolution, rotation, and the inclina- 
tion of the earth's axis. About the first of January the maximum 
distance of the earth from the sun, approximately 94,500,000 miles, 
is reached. This position is called aphelioUj from a, meaning away 
from, and helios, the sun. About July first the minimum distance, 
practically 91,500,000 miles, is recorded. This position is called 
perihelion, from pen, meaning around or near, and helios, the sun. 



The Earth and Its Neighbors 25 

Fig. ro shows the earth revolving about the sun in a plane which 
passes through the center of the bodies. Position *^A" represents 
the relation between the earth and the sun on September 22d. As 
neither the northern nor the southern hemisphere is turned toward 
or away from the sun, the vertical ray of the latter falls upon the 
equator. The boundary between the illuminated and the dark parts 
of the earth (the circle of illumination) passes through the poles, and 
bisects all parallel circles. Since one-half of each parallel circle is in 
the light and one-half in the shadow, the periods of darkness and light 
(day and night) are everywhere equal and twelve hours long. Because 
of this fact this date is called equinox, from osquus, meaning equal, and 
noXj meaning night. 

At all times the earth's axis is maintained parallel to its position at 
"A." As the earth journeys toward "B, '' the northern hemisphere 
turns from the sun and the opposite hemisphere toward it. On 
December 22d the north pole is turned 23° 30' from the sun. The 
vertical ray now falls an equal distance south of the equator, and the 
circle of illumination lacks 23° 30' of reaching the north pole and 
reaches 23° 30' beyond the south pole. At this time all parallel 
circles but the equator are divided unequally by the circle of illumi- 
nation, and therefore day and night are of equal duration at the 
equator only. 

In the northern hemisphere, less than one-half, and in the southern 
hemisphere more than one-half, of each parallel circle is in the sun- 
light. Therefore in the northern hemisphere days are less and in the 
southern hemisphere more than twelve hours long. 

As the amount of solar energy received depends upon the angle 
at which the sun's rays fall upon the earth, the northern hemisphere 
now has winter and the southern hemisphere summer. December 22d 
is the date of the winter solstice in the northern hemisphere. At this 
time the apparent southward journey of the sun gives place to its 
apparent movement toward the equator. 

As has already been stated the earth is nearest to the sun during 
the period of summer in the southern hemisphere. Because of this, 
a little more solar energy is received in this hemisphere during its 
summer than is received in the northern hemisphere during the 
northern sunmier. But owing to the fact that the earth is a little 
nearer to the sun during the southern summer, the rate of the earth's 
revolution is increased. The result of this is that the southern summer 
is seven days shorter than is summer in the northern hemisphere. 

On March 21st the earth has reached position "C." Observe 



26 ' Geography 

that neither hemisphere is turned toward the sun, that the vertical 
ray falls upon the equator and that the circle of illumination passes 
through the poles and bisects all parallel circles. A^ain day and 
night are equal (twelve hours each) on all parts of the earth's surface. 
This is the date of the spring equinox. 




The earth reaches position "D" on June 21st. The north pole is 
now turned toward the sun, and the vertical ray falls 23° 30' north 
of the equator. The circle of illumination extends the same distance 
beyond the north pole, fails to reach the south pole by the same 
number of degrees, and divides all parallel circles but the equator 
unequally. 



The Earth and Its Neighbors 27 

At this season more than one-half of each parallel circle in the 
northern hemisphere, and less than one-half of each parallel circle in 
the southern hemisphere, is in the sunlight. Days are therefore 
longer tha^ nights north of the equator, and shorter than nights 
south of the equator. The most direct rays fall in the northern 
hemisphere, which therefore has its summer. June 21st is the date of 
the spring solstice or time when the apparent northward movement of 
the Sim ceases and the apparent southward movement begins. 

Note that on September 22d the circle of illumination passes 
through the poles. The next day it has passed beyond the north 
pole and does not quite reach the south pole. There is then a small 
circle surrounding the north pole within which the sunlight does not 
fall during a complete period of rotation. There is an equal area sur- 
rounding the south pole which is illuminated during the whole of a 
period of rotation. The next day the diameter of the continuously 
dark circle has been increased slightly, as has that of the continuously 
light circle surrounding the south pole. This continues until Decem- 
ber 22d, when these circles reach their maximum diameter, 23° 30'. 

Between December 22d and March 21st the diameter of the non- 
illuminated circle steadily shortens, as does that of the illuminated 
area surrounding the south pole, and on the date first mentioned 
the circle of illumination once more passes through the poles. 

For a period of six months, September 22d to March 21st, the 
north pole has continuous night and the south pole continuous day. 
The length of the night diminishes from this maximum at the north 
pole to a period of twenty-four hours on the circle 23° 30' from the 
north pole. Similarly during the same time the length of the period of 
sunshine diminishes from six months at the south pole to a day of 
twenty-four hours on the circle 23° 30' from this pole. Everywhere 
on the equatorward sides of the Arctic and Antarctic circles a part of 
every parallel circle is turned toward the sun during every period of 
rotation. Therefore nowhere within these latitudes can there be a 
day or a night of twenty-four hours' duration. As the circle of illumi- 
nation always bisects the equator, day and night are always equal and 
twelve hours long on the equator. 

The Zones — It has been noted that during a period of revolution 
the vertical ray travels over a zone extending 23° 30' each side of the 
equator. This is the tropical zone and is bounded by the tropic of 
Cancer on the north and the tropic of Capricorn on the south. 

Those parts of the earth's surface within which the minimum 
period of sunlight or darkness (depending upon the season) is twenty- 



28 Geography 

four hours, are the frigid zones. The north frigid zone is bounded 
by the Arctic circle, and the south frigid zone by the Antarctic circle. 

That part of the earth's surface 43° in width, and bounded by 
the Arctic circle and the tropic of Cancer, is the north temperate 
zone. The corresponding area south of the equator is the sovih 
temperate zone. 

If the earth's axis were inclined 1° from a perpendicular to the 
plane of its orbit instead of 23° 30' as at present, the vertical rays 
would shift over an area extending 1° on each side of the equator, and 
the tropical zone would have a total width of 2°. If the inclination 
were 2°, the width of the torrid zone would be 4°, and so on. The 
width of each zone is therefore directly or indirectly fixed by the 
inclination of the axis. 

THE SUN 

To the inhabitants of the islands of the sea, a most wonderful 
spectacle is daily presented. Each morning, if the sky is clear, the 
sun, like a great ball of fire, appears to rise from the waters in a 
general easterly direction. Hour by hour it mounts higher in the sky 
and then declines, and finally appears to sink beneath the waves in 
the westiem horizon. 

Those who dwell inland witness the same apparent daily journey 
of the sun about the earth, although the phenomenon is less impres- 
sive. It was quite natural that people should believe that the sun 
actually performed this journey, and it was not until the time of 
Copernicus (1473-1543) that they were undeceived. We now know 
that the earth rotates daily upon its axis, which causes the sun to 
appear to revolve about the earth in the same time. 

You are aware that in various ways the sun influences your daily 
life. Have you ever realized that your life depends absolutely 
upon the sun? If there were no sun, there would be no streams 
gurgling over pebbly beds, no winds whispering among the treetops 
and no waves dashing upon the shores. But for the sun, there would 
be neither flowers, grass, nor trees to give beauty to the earth, and no 
crops could grow in the fields. Without sunshine, not even man with 
all of his power could live upon the earth. 

The sun, although a very distant neighbor of the earth, is the chief 
factor in the physical environment of man. In every phase of the 
subject of geography you will learn of the direct and indirect effects of 
the sun upon your life, and that of all other human beings. Because 
of this, it is important that we know something of the sun itself. 

You have learned that the earth is about 93,000,000 miles from the 



The Earth and Its Neighbors 29 

sun. The figures are not of much value to us in this case, for we can 
form no conception of the distance which they represent. If it were 
possible to travel from the earth to the sun maintaining an average 
speed of 60 miles per hour, the journey would require about 175 years. 

The sun is a gaseous body, at least in its outer portion, and is in a 
state of combustion. It is the heat and light resulting from combus- 
tion and contraction of the sim which warm and illuminate the earth. 
Do not think that we receive all of the solar energy. It is estimated 
that only about 2.606.oVo.6ft<^ P^^ is received by our earth. 

The diameter of the sun is more than one hundred times that of 
the earth, and its mass is about 332,000 times the mass of our planet. 
The spectroscope shows that the same elements which exist in the 
earth's crust exist also in the sun. If these elements are in a gaseous 
or a Uquid form, the temperature must be very high. It is believed 
that at the surface of the sun the temperature is 6000° F. or higher. 

The Solar System. — ^The sun is the controlling power in the 
group of bodies known as the solar system. The members of this 
system, named in the order of increasing distance from the sun, are 
Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune. 
These bodies are called planets. Most of them are attended by one or 
more moons, or satellites. 

Among astronomers it is not generally believed that planets other 
than the earth are inhabited, as the conditions appear to be imfavor- 
able to the existence of such life forms as those with which we are 
acquainted. There has been some discussion regarding the probabiUty 
of human life upon Mars. The mean distance of this planet from the 
sun is about one and one-half times as great as ours. UnUke the earth, 
however, the difference between the maximum and the minimum 
distance is very marked. The mean length of its day is twenty-four 
hours, thirty-seven minutes, and the inclination of its axis is 24° 50'. 
The telescope shows a system of lines upon this planet which a few 
astronomers believe are great irrigation canals. What are beUeved 
to be polar ice caps have also been discovered. The lines are most 
noticeable at the time of the year when the polar snows would be 
melting. The theory is that owing to the melting snow, vegetation 
springs up along the canals, and it is this and not the water which 
is seen. 

THE MOON 

For ages people have regarded the moon with great interest. 
It has been believed that she exercised a great influence upon the 
lives of men, as well as upon weather and crops. Superstition, song 



30 Geography 

and story have been woven about the ^ ^goddess of the night," and 
she has been worshipped by the peoples of many nations. 

Because of the relatively short distance between the earth and 
the moon, about 240,000 miles, the latter is a beautiful and a con- 
spicuous object. Although the moon is very brilliant, it shines by 
reflected sunlight. When the part of the earth upon which we live 
is turned away from the sim, the moon furnishes us with reflected 
sunUght. When a portion of this light falls upon a house and is 
reflected to our eyes, we see the building. The house is therefore 
visible by means of sunlight which has been twice reflected. 

Everyone has observed the spots upon the surface of the moon, 
but it was not until Galileo in 1610 trained his telescope upon her that 
it became known that these spots are hills and mountains. • Many of 
the mountains are extinct volcanoes. 

Although the telescope shows that the moon has a land surface, 
it reveals no water. Neither water nor atmosphere are beUeved to 
exist upon the moon. Hence it is thought that it can have no life 
such as that with which we are familiar. 

As the earth revolves about the sun, so the moon revolves about 
the earth. And as, according to the Nebular Hypothesis, the earth 
is beUeved to be the child of the sun, so the moon is regarded as the 
offspring of the earth. 

The moon revolves in about twenty-nine and one-half days, and 
as the periods of rotation and revolution are identical, the same face 
of the moon is always turned toward us. As it takes three hundred 
and sixty-five days for the earth to perform a complete revolution 
about the- sun, it is clear that the period of the moon's revolution is 
not the equivalent of one of our months. 

One half of the moon is constantly illuminated by the sun. But 
since the moon keeps the same face toward the earth, we see all or 
none of the illuminated area, according to the relative positions of the 
sun, earth and moon. When we see all of the ilhmiinated part we 
say that the moon is full. When only about one-half is visible we 
speak of the phase as the first or the third quarter. New moon occurs 
when that part of the moon which is turned toward us is just begin- 
ning to receive sunlight. 

At times the moon passes between the sun and the earth in such 
position as to partially or completely obscure the light of the sun. 
Because of this we have a partial or a complete eclipse of the sun. 
Occasionally the earth occupies such a position between the sun and 
the moon that the latter is entirely within the shadow of the earth. 



The EIarth and Its Neighbors 31 

At such times the moon is said to be eclipsed. Primitive peoples were 
greatly alarmed when eclipses occurred. 

Although it is no longer generally believed that the moon influences 
the weather, crops, health and mental growth, it is related to human 
life in a very important way. The moon is the chief factor in the 
production of the tides which have so much to do with the commerce 
of many seaports. 

Gravity and Gravitation. — ^The force of the explosion of a charge 
of gunpowder in a cannon may be sufficient to project a cannon ball 
many miles. Imagine a cannon pointed directly away from the 
surface of the earth and fired. Why does not the ball continue indefi- 
nitely in the direction in which it started? Why does it invariably 
return to the earth? 

It requires a force outside of the cannon ball to set it in motion, 
and unless that force be overcome the ball will continue in motion. 
Sir Isaac Newton (1642-1727) stated this in the form of a general law 
called the law of inertia. The law may be stated as follows: Every 
body continues in a state of rest or of uniform motion in a straight 
line, unless some force outside itself compels it to change that state. 

The force which sets the cannon ball in motion is the explosion; 
the force which changes its direction of motion and finally brings it 
again to a state of rest is called gravity. This is a force which every 
particle of matter in the universe exerts upon every other particle. 
As appUed to the earth, this force is called gravity, but as applied to 
the universe, it is called gravitation. It is then gravity which arrests 
the cannon ball in its flight and brings it to rest upon the surface of 
the earth. A bird must use muscular energy in order to fly; that is, to 
temporarily overcome the force of gravity. This use of energy in 
time exhausts the bird, and as gravity continues to act, the bird must 
alight or fall to the earth. Gravity causes the raindrops to fall and 
streams to flow invariably toward sea level. It is gravity which holds 
human beings to the earth and makes escape from it impossible. 
Attention must be paid to gravity in erecting buildings. Gravitation 
is the cause of the tides, as explained in Chapter XV. 

Bodies having the greatest moss, that is the greatest amount of 
material in them, have the greatest attraction for each other. The 
first law of gravitation is: Attraction is directly proportional to the 
mass of the bodies. For example, let the mass of a given body "A" 
be represented by 3 and the mass of a given body "B'' by 6. Since 
the mass of B is twice the mass of A, the latter will attract the former 
with twice the force which A will exert upon B. 



32 Geography 

The second law is 1 Gravitation varies inversely as the square 

of the distance. Let the distance between A and B be represented by 

2, and that between A and C by 4. The square of 2 is 4, and the 

square of 4 is 16. Applying the l^,w, we see that the attraction be- 

" tween A and B is four times as great as that between A and C. 

It is because the mass of the sun is so much greater than that of 
any of the planets that it is the controlling force. And it is because 
each heavenly body attracts all others that the individual members 
are kept in their orbits. 

The Nebular Hypothesis. — How the solar system originated is 
not known. Near the end of the eighteenth century, Laplace, a 
French mathematician, advanced the theory to Which the name 
nebular hypothesis was given. According to the theory it was con- 
ceived that all of the materia now found in the solar system was once 
in the form of an immense nebulous mass, similar to nebulae now 
seen in the heavens. As a result of contraction this incandescent mass 
began to rotate. Cooling led to shrinkage, and shrinkage to an 
increase in the rate of rotation. 

In time gravity and centrifugal force became equal on the equa- 
torial portion of the surface. When this condition was reached the 
outer portion was no longer drawn toward the center of the mass, 
which continued shrinking. Thus an equatorial ring-like body was 
left encircling the central mass and rotating about it. Later this 
equatorial ring was converted into a spherical body and is now known 
as the planet Neptune. In the same way other rings and other planets 
were formed. The sun is that part of the original mass not fashioned 
into planets. 

According to the nebular hypothesis the earth was once a vaporous 
globe highly heated. As a result of cooling it liquefied, and continued 
cooMng resulted in the formation of a solid crust over a molten 
interior. When the crust had cooled sufficiently, rain water remained 
upon the surface, and gradually the oceans were formed. In time 
the atmosphere became sufficiently purified, and its temperature 
sufficiently reduced, to permit of the existence of low forms of plant life. 

The Planetesimal Hypothesis. — In recent years it has been found 
that the nebular hypothesis does not adequately explain the origin 
of the solar system. Professors Thomas C. ChamberUn and Forest 
Hay Moulton, both of the University of Chicago, have worked out 
what is known as the planetesimal theory. 

The telescope reveals many spiral, nebulous masses having limai- 
ixous centers, and streamers issuing from opposite sides. Along these 



The Earth and Its Neighbors 33 

streamers there are knot-like points where the density appears to be 
greater than in other parts. 

All the particles and the knots of such a spiral nebula are believed 
to revolve, each in an independent orbit, about the central mass. These 
bodies are called planetesimals (little planets) because they act as do 
the planets. It is believed that the knot-like masses may have 
gradually gathered the planetesimals about them as our earth gathers 
meteorites. Thus the planets may have come into existence. 

If this theory be correct, our earth is the result of the very slow 
accumulation of particles about a center. When the mass of the earth 
was relatively slight, gravitation may not have been strong enough 
to enable it to hold an atmosphere. In tune an atmosphere was 
acquired and later the oceans developed. With the growth of the 
earth, heat increased, because of the increase in the force of gravity, 
the center having the highest temperature. 

Some of the gases which formed the atmosphere may have been 
derived from the interior of the earth. Water vapor, nitrogen and 
carbon dioxide, because they are relatively heavy, were among the 
gases early acquired. In time the water vapor condensed and rains 
fell. With water on the surface of the earth, various geological pro- 
cesses were set in motion, oceans were formed, and finally life began. 

According to the older theory the earth is steadily cooling,. hence 
its atmosphere is cooUng and life will in time become extinct. Accord- 
ing to the newer theory, the slow accumulation of particles by which 
the earth was formed will continue. The atmosphere will slowly 
increase, and Uf e will continue to evolve. 

the stars 

Centuries ago the stars entered much more largely into the 
thoughts of men than they do today. The mild climate of the 
Mediterranean countries favored life out of doors, and this naturally 
stimulated observation of the heavens. To the people of ancient 
times the stars were mysterious as well as beautiful, and they played 
an important part in mythology, literature and daily life. On the 
occasion of important events, the positions of certain stars were care- 
fully observed. One's life was believed to be in part governed by the 
star under whose influence he was bom. Shakespeare shows us that 
even in his day this superstition had not disappeared, for he makes 
Cassius say to Brutus: "The fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars, 
but in ourselves, that we are underlings. '' ^ 

1 * 'Julius Caesar," Act 1, Scene II. 
3 



34 Geography 

Many stars were known and named before the beginning of the 
Christian Era, but the telescope, invented by Galileo, has revealed a 
vast number not visible to the imaided eye. The light from some 
stars, so distant that they are beyond the range of the telescope, 
affects the sensitive plate of the camera. 

Nearly a million stars have been classified, and astronomers believe 
that there are many millions. Light travels at the velocity of 
186,000 miles per second, yet so distant is the nearest star that more 
than four years are required for its light to reach the earth. Such 
vast distances, when stated in miles, are meaningless, hence the 
expression "light-years'' is employed. The distance of the star just 
referred to is four light-years, because four years are required for its 
light to reach the earth. 

Many of the apparently tiny stars are in reality suns, some of them 
larger than our world. They are thought to. be incandescent bodies 
of gas, shining by their own light. 

When you spend a cloudless night out of doors, far removed from 
the glare of city streets, you can in a measure appreciate the Bible 
statement : " The heavens declare the glory of God. " 

In speaking of the wonders of the heavens Emerson says: 

"If the stars should appear one night in a thousand years, how 
would men believe and adore and preserve for many generations the 
remembrance of the City of God which has been shown." 

STUDIES 

Why did the people of long ago beUeve the earth to be flat? Does the circum- 
navigation of the earth prove the earth to be a sphere? Ascertain the difference 
between standard and solar time in your city. Find the length of the longest 
day in your latitude. Compare the length of winter in the northern and in the 
southern hemispheres. If a person were on the Arctic circle on December 22nd, 
where would he see the sun at noon? At what angle does the most direct ray of the 
sun fall in your latitude? 

REFERENCES 

Chambeklin and Salisbury: ''Earth History," vol. ii, Chapters I and II. 

Comstock: ' *A Textbook of Astronomy. " 

Johnson, Willis: ''Mathematical Geography." 

Lowell, Percival: "The Evolution of Worlds." 

Martin, Martha Evans: "The Ways of the Planets." 

MouLTON, Forest Ray: "An Introduction to Astronomy." 

Serviss, Garrett: "Other Worlds." 



CHAPTER III 

The Atmosphere 

General Statement. — Imagine yourself held by an invisible, a 
mysterious, yet an irresistible power, to the bottom of the ocean. 
You are free to move about, to climb to the tops of submerged moun- 
tains, to engage in various occupations, but you cannot escai>e from 
the floor of the sea. About and above you glide fishes of varied form 
and hue, whose movements are supported by the waters. Far above 
your head is the never ceasing roll of the waves, while a gentle move- 
ment of the waters twice each day is the only indication of that won- 
derful response which the ocean makes to the attractive power of the 
moon and sun. 

This strange, imaginary situation is more than equaled by the 
sober facts. You are chained to the floor of a sea so vast that the 
great watery expanse sinks into insignificance beside it; so vast that 
the exact position of its surface is unknown. Miles above your head 
its great waves roll to and fro. Currents many miles in width flow 
forever onward, each in a well defined course, while mighty tides 
sweep round and round the planet. Birds and other creatures with 
ease and grace dart here and there through this transparent sea, 
sometimes rising almost beyond the limit of your vision. But you 
are compelled to spend your life at the bottom of the flood in which 
you are submerged. Indeed, were it possible for you to escape from 
it you could live but a very few minutes. 

This vast atmospheric sea, on the floor of which every individual 
lives, surrounds the earth, extending outward from its so-called sur- 
face for a great but an unknown distance. It mingles with the less 
extensive aqueous sea, and it penetrates, to some extent, the crust of 
the earth. 

The movements of this boundless sea are under the control of the 
sim. While never at rest, it is sometimes quite calm, but at other 
times great storms sweep through it. Now, in response to a magic 
touch, seeds germinate, a mantle of green covers the earth, and blos- 
soms beautify the landscape. Again by another magic touch, plant 
life withers, animals migrate, the streams and lakes are sealed with 
ice, and even man is compelled to change his habits of life. 

The atmosphere is the most vital factor in our environment. Food 
and drink we must have at intervals, but deprive us of the atmosphere, 

35 



36 Geography 

and we perish at once. While we are, to a certain extent, unconscious 
of its presence, we are immediately conscious of imusual changes in its 
condition. Aside from being an absolute necessity, the atmosphere 
exerts a marked control over our food supply, the nature of our cloth- 
ing, our homes, our methods of travel, our health, our business, our 
pleasure, and our mental and moral qualities. Even our great coal 
deposits are definitely related to atmospheric conditions which existed 
ages ag<J. An understanding of atmospheric conditions and controls 
is invaluable to the mariner, the farmer, the fruitgrower, the cattle 
raiser; to those who, in great cities, deal in the products of the soil; 
to the builders of railroads, water-works, and bridges, and to the home 
and health-seeker. 

Atmosphere Diffuses Heat and Light. — ^The atmosphere, while 
not retarding the movement of solar energy, or insolationy from the sun 
to the earth, does hinder in a marked degree the escape of heat from 
the earth's surface. Without the atmosphere the diurnal, or daily, 
range of temperature would be so great as to make the existence of 
life, as we know it, impossible. The adjustment between temperature 
and life is indeed a very delicate one. The sun with its fearful heat of 
thousands of degrees is constantly facing us. Between our earth and 
this fiery mass are the depths of space where temperatures hundreds 
of degrees below freezing point exist. The atmosphere is a mediator, 
a life preserver. Through its action, temperatures at which it is pos- 
sible for life to exist are maintained. At a comparatively few miles 
above sea level, even in the tropical zone, there is a realm of death. 
This lifeless plane stretches like a curtain over all the earth, being 
much lower in polar than in equatorial regions. Each night there is 
stealthy approach of this plane of death toward the sleeping world, 
but with the return of the sun it again withdraws. Were the whole 
earth to experience continuous sunshine or darkness for a few weeks 
human life would in all probability become extinct. 

The atmosphere diffuses light as well as heat. In the absence of an 
atmosphere, places upon which the direct sunlight did not fall would 
be poorly lighted. The diffusion of sunlight is chiefly due to the dust 
held in suspension in the air. These dust particles scatter in all 
directions the Ught which they receive, thus lighting the air and objects 
which are in the shade. 

Atmosphere Distributes Moisture. — Not only does the atmos- 
phere distribute heat and light, it is the great carrier of moisture as 
well. Through the process of evaporation, water is taken up from the 
oceans, lakes and streams, as well as from the lands, and in the form 



The Atmosphere 37 

of vapor, borne by the winds to all parts of the world. Under favor- 
able conditions, this moisture is precipitated, thus giving to the regions 
where it falls in sufficient amount great forests or grassy plains. 

Atmosphere Aids in the Distribution of Life. — ^The winds are 
important factors in distributing seeds and plants, thus enlarging the 
range of plant forms. The thistle, tumble weed, dandelion, sticktight, 
maple and hop are all adapted to wind transportation. Birds are often 
carried far out of their courses by storms. Human history has been, 
in some measure, influenced by the movements of the atmosphere. 
The ships of Columbus and Magellan were drifted before the constant 
trade winds, and the influence of the monsoons upon the commerce 
with India was iharked in early times. Even today the winds are a 
factor in ocean conmierce. Because of the influence of the trade 
winds it requires a shorter time to sail from San Francisco to Honolulu 
than from Honolulu to San Francisco. 

Atmosphere Aids in Weathering and Erosion. — ^To the movements 
of the atmosphere waves and currents are due. Waves beat against 
the lands, tearing them down, carrying the waste far and wide, and 
scattering it over the floor of the ocean, thus filling harbors and build- 
ing islands, bars, and other shore forms. Ocean currents are great 
heat carriers, and they are not without influence on ocean navigation 
at the present day. 

The atmosphere is an important geological agent. Increase and 
decrease in temperature bring about expansion and contraction of the 
rocks. In this way the outer part is cracked. Fragments of rocks 
which have been broken off by this process will be found at the base of 
any cliff. Such an accumulation of material is known as talus. .On 
account of its moisture and gases, the atmosphere acts chemically 
as well as mechanically upon the rocks, thus producing a slow but 
constant disintegration, the most important result of which is the 
formation of soil. 

The winds erode the rocks by hurling sand grains against them, creat- 
ing most fantastic forms. Immense quantities of material are carried 
by the winds for long distances, to be deposited on land or in the sea. 

Atmosphere a Part of the Earth'. — ^When we open a window in a 
rapidly moving express train we feel the apparent rush of the atmos- 
phere as the train cuts its way through it. The earth in the latitude 
of New York City is rotating eastward at the rate of about 800 miles 
per hour. Were the earth rotating through or in the atmosphere, 
every movable object on its surface would be swept away by the fric- 
tion. The fact that we are totally unconscious of any such friction 



38 Geographt 

may be taken as a proof that the atmosphere rotates with the earth — 
is a part of it. 

Extent of the Atmosphere. — How far from the earth the atmos- 
phere extends is not known. It exists on the tops of the most lofty 
mountains and at the greatest heights reached by sounding balloons, 



about 22 miles. Astronomical observations show that its outer limit 
is at least as far as 175 miles from sea level, for meteors have been 
observed at that altitude. If it were uniform in density, it« upper 
limit would be found at a height of about five miles, for at sea level a 
column of atmosphere of given cross-section will sustain the we%ht 
of a column of mercury of the same cross-section and about thirty 
inches in height. The density of mercury is 10,784 times that of air 
at sea level, and 10,784 times thirty inches gives five miles. 



The Atmosphere 39 

As the atmosphere is highly elastic, its density rapidly decreases 
with increase of altitude. About 900 feet above sea level, and parallel 
to it, we may picture a surface where the barometer would read 
twenty-nine inches. 

As the volume of gases is inversely proportional to the pressure, 
a barometric reading of twenty-eight inches would be found at a 
height of 29/28 of 900 feet above the surface of twenty-nine inches, 
or at an altitude of 1,832 feet above the sea. According to this, the 
upper limit of the atmosphere would be found at an infinite distance 
above sea level. 

In passing through the atmosphere meteors generate so much 
heat as a result of friction that they become luminous. It is be- 
lieved that they do not become luminous until after they enter 
the atmosphere. The altitudes at which meteors appear can be at 
least approximated . 

Composition of he Atmosphere. — ^As is well known, our atmos- 
phere consists of oxygen and nitrogen, mixed, not combined, in the 
proportion of about 21 per cent, of the former to 78 per cent, of the 
latter. In addition there is about 1 per cent, of argon, .03 per cent, 
of carbon dioxide gas, a small amount of vapor of water, dust and 
various other substances, among them being ammonia, nitric acid, 
hydrogen, helium and krypton. 

By weight the atmosphere contains : — 

Billions of Tons 

Oxygen (O) 1,233,010 

Nitrogen (N) 3,994,593 

Carbon dioxide (CO2) 5,287 

Vapor of water 54,461 

Oxygen. — From the standpoint of human life, the most important 
element in the atmosphere is oxygen. We could not exist for an hour 
if deprived of it, yet in too large amount it is destructive to life. 
Oxygen is the most common element in the crust of the earth, con- 
stituting 47 per cent, of it, and it forms 86 per cent, of the water of the 
ocean. 

It unites readily with all of the elements but fluorine. In the rust- 
ing or oxidation of metals and rocks we have a familiar illustration of 
the fact that the atmosphere is constantly being deprived of its 
oxygen. The oxygen is the most important element in keeping down 
the percentage of carbon dioxide in the blood. The blood, while in the 
lungs, gains oxygen and loses carbon dioxide. 

Few people breathe deeply enough and are therefore deficient in 



40 Geography 

oxygen. The average amount of air taken into the lungs by an adult 
at each inspiration is about 30 cubic inches. This is only one-tenth of 
the capacity of the lungs. We inhale about fifteen times per minute 
and therefore an adult at rest requires about 400 cubic feet of air in 
twenty-four hours, while a man exercising violently uses from 600 to 
1,000 cubic feet in the same time. Although the process of breathing 
is, for the most part, an unconscious one, it represents a tremendous 
amount of work. It has been estimated that the energy daily 
expended in this process by an adult is sufficient to lift twenty-one 
tons one foot in the same time. 

Each living being may be regarded as an engine or a machine. 
In the case of an engine the fuel, which is largely carbon, unites with 
oxygen, producing CO2, heat and light. Similarly oxygen unites with 
the blood and the food. One of the products of this union is CQ2, 
which is thrown off by the lungs. The oxygen unites with the food, 
thus liberating the energy which the latter contains. 

Nitrogen. — Unlike oxygen, nitrogen is a very rare element in the 
crust of the earth, although it is very abundant in the atmosphere. 
It is spoken of as the inert element of the atmosphere, and does not 
readily imite with other elements. It increases the density of the 
atmosphere,, thus giving it greater force, making it easier for birds 
to fly, and enabling it to carry sound farther than it otherwise could. 
The ^eat value of nitrogen, however, lies in the fact that it supplies 
food to plants. Farmers have for a long time been in the habit of 
planting their fields to clover to restore their fertility. It remained 
for science, however, to discover why this result was obtained. Clover 
and certain other leguminous plants, such as beans and peas, have 
nodules on their roots. In these are bacteria which abstract nitrogen 
from the air and supply it to the plants in the form of compounds. 
This readily suggests wonderful possibilities in agriculture, for science 
is drawing upon the great atmospheric supply of nitrogen, making it 
possible to fertilize our fields on a large scale. 

Carbon Dioxide. — Carbon dioxide, although small in amount, is 
one of the most important elements in the atmosphere. All animal 
organisms inhale oxygen, and exhale CO2. While directly it is a 
menace to animal life, since it poisons the atmosphere, indirectly it is 
the supporter of it, for it is the chief food of plants. The CO2 is taken 
up by certain plant cells, and under the action of sunshine, the 
chlprophyll, a green substance occupying the pores of these cells, 
decomposes it into oxygen and carbon. The oxygen is liberated,. but 
the carbon is retained to build up .the tissues of the plant. This 



The Atmosphere 41 

process is known as photosynthesis. Thus through the vegetables, 
grains, fruits and even the meats that we eat, the fibers that enter into 
the manufacture of our clothing, and the timber of which our homes 
are constructed, is our own daily life dependent upon carbon dioxide. 
As plants are constantly taking from the atmosphere the CO2 given 
to it by animals, combustion and volcanic action, the air is thus left 
in better condition for man's use. 

It has been noted that the percentage of carbon dioxide gas is 
somewhat greater by night than by day, and in cloudy than in clear 
weather. The inactivity of the chlorophyll when the sun is not shin- 
ing explains this. 

Carbon dioxide gas seems to have the property of exerting a great 
control over the atmospheric temperatures. It is estimated that an 
increase of 50 per cent, in the amount of this gas would give to the 
Eskimo a land decked with palm trees, while an equal decrease would 
result in covering most of the temperate zone with perpetual snow and 
ice. How largely this figured during the Carboniferous Age and the 
Glacial Period is not known. 

Water carrying CO2 dissolved in it becomes a very important 
geologic agent from the standpoint of chemical action, for it dissolves 
limestone rock quite readily. It was chiefly through such chemical 
action that our wonderful caverns were formed. 

Under the ordinary conditions in the open air the amount of cai*bon 
dioxide gas remains practically the same. Exceptions to this are 
found, however, in the neighborhood of a(;tive volcanoes, and certain 
fissures in the crust of the earth from which the gas escapes. In some 
of these localities, as in a small valley in Yellowstone Park, the 
amount is so great as to cause the death of animals. In crowded rooms 
and cars the percentage is perceptibly increased, and this is usually 
made apparent by a disagreeable odor. When the air of a room is 
overloaded with this gas, its very presence tends to check the expul- 
sion of it by the system, and thus a very important and necessary 
process is retarded. 

An adult, when working, gives oflf about one cubic foot of CO2 
per hour. The burning of a cubic foot of gas poisons the air of a room 
as much as does a person. With the burning of a single ton of coal 
there passes into the atmosphere more than 60,000 cubic feet of this 
gas. This shows the importance of ventilation. 

Water Vapor. — ^The atmosphere in all places and at all times 
contains some moisture in the form of water vapor. The condition of 
the atmosphere with respect to water vapor is spoken of as the 



42 Geographt 

humidity of the atmosphere. Humidity varies greatly according to 
place and time. On the one hand we have the very dry air of the hot 
deserts, and on the other, the moisture laden air of the equatorial 
jimgles, with all of the resulting differences in the plant, animal and 
human life. The atmosphere of a room 40' x 40' x 15' at a tempera- 
ture of 60° F. can contain 20 pounds of water, or about enough to 
fill a common water pail. 

It is the relative not the absolute amoimt of moisture in the atmos- 
phere with which we are chiefly concerned, however. Relative 
humidity expresses the degree of saturation in relation to the e3dsting 
temperatures. An increase in temperature expands the air, increases 
its capacity for moistiure, and hence lowers the relative himiidity. 

Relative humidity is closely related to temperature ranges and to 
the influence of temperature on life. A low degree of himiidity favors 
rapid radiation and rapid evaporation. Consequently in dry regions - 
it is cool in the shade and at night. But for the water vapor in the 
atmosphere night temperatures, even in the summer, would be low 
and the day temperatures would be much higher than they now are. 
Radiation being much slower in moist regions, a hot day is likely '^o 
be followed by a hot night. This results in far more than discomfort. 
It lowers the vitality, induces disease, and in the case of those seriously 
ill may retard or prevent recovery. 

Through tTie process of condensation, moisture is being constantly 
removed from the atmosphere, and through the process of evaporation 
it is as constantly being restored. The Timount of water vapor in the 
air is measured by an instrument caUed a hygrometer. 

In every cubic foot of water there are believed to be millions of 
molecules, each vibrating under the influence of the sun. Heat is a 
form of motion. The more rapid the movement of the molecules 
the greater the intensity. of the heat. In some cases the movement is 
so rapid that certain molecules leap above the surface of the water, 
and are carried upward by air currents. 

Argon. — Of argon, the most dense of the elements of the atmos- 
phere, little is known. It exists in close combination with nitrogen 
and was not discovered until 1894. 

Ozone.-^-Ozone is a form of oxygen. It averages in the country 
about MoOjOOO part of a given volume of atmosphere. In crowded 
cities little or none is f oimd. Ozone is even more active than oxygen 
in its union with other substances. The dust which all rooms contain 
quickly exhausts the supply of ozone. Its presence is a guarantee 
that the air is free from organic impurities and decay. 



The Atmosphere 43 

Dust and Other Impurities. — Dust and smoke are the most 
important of the organic impurities of the atmosphere. Near the 
surface of the land dust is everywhere present, and it is even carried 
far out to sea. Vessels on the Atlantic, west of Sahara, have had their 
sails reddened by dust carried out by the trades. Admit a ray of 
sunshine into a darkened room, and observe the countless dust par- 
ticles dancing along its path. Now set the air in rapid motion and their 
number is greatly increased. 

The air currents are constantly gathering dust from the earth's 
sm^ace, and carrying it before them, depositing it perhaps many miles 
from the place where it was picked up. In some places, as in Central 
Asia, caravans have been destroyed and whole cities buried by this 
wind-borne sand. 

Active volcanoes send great quantities of dust into the atmos- 
phere. Most of this settles in a comparatively short time, in the 
vicinity of the volcano from which it came. Some of this dust en- 
circles the globe. Of the dust hurled into the air at the time of the 
great eruption of Krakatoa (1883) particles remained in the atmos- 
phere for two or three years. 

.From every chimney in our cities clouds of smoke are rising. In the 
case of great manufacturing cities this smoke often literally darkens 
the sky. Because of this, a clear view of a manufacturing center can 
rarely be obtained from the tops of any of its tall buildings. The dust 
which settles in the City of London in a single month amounts to 
several tons to the square mile. 

These dust particles cool rapidly, and hence each serves as. a center 
for the condensation of moisture. Dust is an important factor in 
causing rain. Because of dust, fog and cloud become more prevalent 
in a great industrial center than they would otherwise be. London 
furnishes the most striking illustration. This great city has on the 
average but fifteen hours of sunshine during either January or Decem- 
ber; a state of affairs almost inconceivable to us. Greenwich, just 
outside, has forty-five hours of sunshine during each of these months, 
while Kew, a little farther away, has seventy-one hours. From 1871 
to 1890 there was an increase in the nimiber of fogs in London amount- 
ing to 50 per cent. Very recent investigations seem to indicate that 
foggy days are now decreasing in number. 

During dense fogs the streets are dark at midday, therefore streets 
•as well as homes, schools and places of business must be lighted. This 
means a great expense for light, added expense for fuel, the depression 
which accompanies absence of sunshine, discouragement because of 



44 Geography 

impossibility of keeping things clean, increase in accidents, disease and 
death. Post-mortem examinations of the lungs of persons who have 
spent their. Uves in London have shown them clogged with soot. 

The most important of the organic impm-ities are the bacteria of 
animal life, such as the germs of disease. These the winds waft to 
all parts of the world. In addition, there are the vegetable forms, such 
as the molds or fungi, which produce the fermentation and decay of 
organic matter. The flavor of fruits and the luxuriant growth of 
leguminous crops is due to certain bacteria. Experiments carried on 
in France showed 345 bacteria per cubic centimeter in the country and 
4,790 in the heart of Paris. • Air at high altitudes, as well as that over 
the ocean, contains few bacteria. Houses should be well ventilated 
and should freely admit sunshine, as under these conditions bacteria 
are not numerous. 

Temperature. — ^At a distance of about 93,000,000 miles from the 
earth is the sun. This distant incandescent globe is the controller of 
our temperatures. If the light of the sun were cut oflf at this instant 
we would still continue to enjoy the sunUght for eight minutes. In 
other words light, traveling at the enormous speed of 186,000 miles 
per second, requires eight minutes to reach the earth. This gives some 
idea of the vast distance of the sun from the earth. 

Every form of plant and animal life depends upon the sim for 
existence, and all life constantly expresses the relationship between 
itself and this glowing sphere. With the change in the angle at which 
his rays fall upon the earth, we change from the lightest garments to 
furs, from life out of doors, under the trees and beside the streams to 
life within walls beside a fire. A change in temperature of but a few 
degrees often means a loss of thousands of dollars. The effect of a 
mere mass of clouds obscuring the sun for a single day is reflected in 
our daily lives. 

Here it will be well to recall the fact that heat is not a substance, 
but a form of energy, and that it is the result of the movement 
of the molecules of which all bodies are composed. The degree of heat 
we express in terms of temperature. 

Heat is transmitted in a number of ways. Radiation implies trans- 
mission from a hotter to a colder medium. At night the earth radiates 
heat to the colder atmosphere. Conduction implies the transmission 
of heat from one part of a body to another, as from end to end of a 
hot iron rod. Convection implies movement of the molecules in the 
body itself, as in the circulation of the atmosphere. Heat is also 
reflected, as from the surface of a body of water. 



The Atmosphere 45 

The temperature of the sun at its surface is variously estimated 
at from 6,000° to 7,000° F. and the temperature* of the interior is no 
doubt much higher. Could we build up a column of ice two miles 
in cross-section, and reaching to the sun, the total amount of heat 
given off by the latter would be sufficient to melt it in one second. 
The heat received on one square mile by vertical rays would raise 
750 tons of water from freezing to boiling in one minute. Great as 
is the amoimt of heat given off by the sun, the earth receives only 
about 1/2,000,000,000 part. The remainder, so far bjb we are con- 
cerned, is lost. 

It is believed that the contraction of the sun is the chief source of 
its heat. According to Helmholtz, an annual contraction of 250 feet 
in the sim's diameter would be sufficient to account for the heat given 
ofif in the same time. 

The energy given off by the sun is called insolation. It is not 
transformed into heat until it strikes the surface of the earth. It is 
then radiated and reflected into the atmosphere. The atmosphere 
is thus warmed from the bottom, which accounts for its being colder 
at high altitudes than it is near the earth's surface. Mountains are 
colder than the valleys below them because there is comparatively 
little land at high altitudes to radiate and reflect heat and because 
dust and water vapor favor the absorption of heat. Dust is not 
usually abundant in mountainous regions and the capacity of the 
atmosphere for water vapor rapidly decreases with decrease in tem- 
perature. On the average, temperature falls 1° F. for each 330 feet 
of ascent. This is about three hundred times as rapid as the fall in 
temperature with the increase in latitude. Recent studies indicate 
that beyond the altitude of about seventeen miles temperature re- 
mains fairly constant. 

Insolation depends upon the angle at which the sun's rays strike 
the earth, the distance of the earth from the sun, and the duration 
of sunshine. The greatest amount of insolation received by a given 
place during a period of rotation is at noon, while the greatest amount 
received during a period of revolution is on June 21st (for the northern 
hemisphere) . As is well known, the earth is nearer the sun in January 
than in July, and the actual amount of insolation received in January 
is about 7 per cent, more than that received in July. During the 
summer in high latitudes, the great length of the day is a marked 
compensation for the low angle at which the sun's rays strike the 
siuface of the earth. On June 21st the insolation at the North Pole 
is 20 per cent, greater than that at the equator on September 21st 



46 Geography 

or March 21st. The possible duration of continuous sunshine varies 
from twelve hours at the equator to six months at the poles. 

There is no direct relation between insolation and temperature, 
as is shown by the fact that places on the same parallel have very 
different temperatures. There is a regular diurnal variation in tem- 
perature, due to the rotation of the earth; a seasonal variation, 
due to revolution; a latitudinal variation, due to the varying 
angle at which the sun's rays strike the earth, and an altitudinal 
variation, due to the fact that the atmosphere is warmed from 
the bottom. 

Pressure. — It is not difficult to realize that a column of iron or 
stone, one inch in cross-section, and extending from the surface of 
the earth to a height of, say, one hundred miles, would have a tre- 
mendous weight. It is difficult to realize that a column of atmos- 
phere of the same dimensions has weight. TorriceUi in 1643 was the 
first to prove this. 

The atmosphere, like everything else, is acted upon by gravitj'-, 
which draws it toward the center of the earth. The measure of this 
attraction as applied to the air is its weight, which at sea level nor- 
mally amounts to 14.7 pounds per square inch. The reason why the 
mercury in a barometer stands lower on a mountain than at sea level 
is not simply because the air is less dense at high altitudes, but 
chiefly because, as greater and greater altitudes are reached, there is 
more and more of the atmosphere left below and less and less to weigh. 
According to Bonney the average reading of the barometer at the City 
of Mexico is 23.07 inches; at the top of Pike's Peak, 17.75 inches, and 
on the summit of Chimborazo, 14.11 inches. 

Pressure is vitally related to human life. Most persons experience 
considerable difficulty in ascending to great altitudes, while many 
cannot live at altitudes of a few thousand feet. A large part of the 
population of the earth is found below 1,000 feet in altitude. Roughly, 
the altitude at which "moimtain sickness," as it is called, is expe- 
rienced, is from 3,500 to 4,000 meters, or about 13,000 feet. There are, 
of course, exceptions to this. In Bolivia there is a colony of miners 
at an altitude of 16,000 feet, while the Indians who bring sulphur 
from the crater of Popocatepetl live at altitudes varying from 13,000 
to 16,000 feet, and in both cases the people seem well and strong. 
Observation, however, shows that those who live at great altitudes 
are usually lacking in vigor. 

Those who ascend lofty mountains are generally afflicted with 
mountain sickness whether they exercise or not. The trouble seems 



The Atmosphere 47 

to be due to a decrease in oxygen in the blood. Examination of the 
blood in such cases shows a lack of the red coloring matter. 

It is atmospheric pressure that lifts the water from a well in which 
an ordinary pump is used. A cubic inch of water weighs .036 of a 
pound, and 14.7 divided by .036 gives 34, or the length in feet of a 
column of water that can be sustained by atmospheric pressure. 
Therefore a simple piunp cannot be used in a well that is more than 
thirty-four feet deep. Atmospheric pressure is utilized in connection 
with bicycles, automobiles, air-brakes and vacumn cleaners. 

The relation between atmospheric pressure and cooking is inter- 
esting, although not very important. It is a common saying that 
water will not boil on high mountains. As a matter of fact water 
boils more readily on the summit of a lofty mountain than it does in 
the valley below. Owing to decreased pressure the water boils at a 
lower temperature, hence it is difficult to cook certain foods, such as 
beans and potatoes. It takes about twice as long to cook potatoes at 
an altitude of 10,000 feet as at sea level. 

The Origin of the Atmosphere. — ^Vast as is the atmosphere, it is 
believed by some to be but a very small part of the original mass. 
It is held that all the planets were once in the form of a great nebula 
which rotated anti-clockwise. Through countless centuries most of 
this mass gathered about a common center, thus forming the sun. 
Smaller portions, in a similar way, produced the other heavenly bodies. 
This gives some meaning to the fact that all these bodies, so far as 
known, rotate and revolve in the same direction. 

The original nebula was, of course, at a very high temperature, for 
all substances found on the earth were then in a gaseous condition. As 
the temperature of space is exceedingly low, about —459° F., the earth 
has been, and is, steadily but slowly cooling. As the cooling went on 
certain elements were precipitated. The first were those having a 
high condensation temperature. This process would place the rocks 
just where we find them — ^in the center. Water, having a very low 
temperature of condensation, was not precipitated until much later, 
and therefore we find it surrounding the rocks. How many ages 
passed before the first rain reached the earth no one can tell, but that 
event was most important in the evolution of the world. Air, requir- 
ing a temperature of —328° F. for its condensation, has not yet 
been liquefied in nature. 

This historic atmosphere was hot, vaporous, acidic and dense. 
The water alone increased its weight about one hundred and fifty 
times, while the material which at a later time took the form of rocks 



48 Geography 

added much more to its weight. This attempt to explain the origin 
of our atmosphere, its conditions and many other facts, is known as 
the Nebular Hypothesis, 

Future of the Atmosphere. — It has been shown that the atmos- 
phere has undergone great changes in the past. Is it now changing? 
What will be its condition in the future? It seems reasonable to be- 
lieve that the sun is slowly decreasing in temperature, and as the 
temperature of the atmosphere is controlled by the sun, we may 
conclude that the atmosphere is gradually getting colder. 

The gradual abstraction of oxygen from the atmosphere through 
the process of oxidation will in time so reduce the amount of this 
gas in the atmosphere that life as we now know it cannot exist. 
As the earth cools, more and more moisture will be taken from the 
atmosphere, and less and less returned to it through the process of 
evaporation. As the nitrogen does not readily unite with other ele- 
ments there may be comparatively little change in that. 

STUDIES 

What proof that the atmosphere penetrates the ocean? Explain how shore 
forms are to a certain extent the result of the work of the atmosphere? Why do 
quarrymen often reject the surface rock? How can the altitude at which a meteor 
is seen be determined? Does the earth radiate heat during the day? Is it possible 
that the surface temperatures of the earth are in large part due to the heat of the 
interior? Why do not places which receive an equal amount of insolation register 
the same temperature? Give examples of radiation, conduction and convection. 
Why do people, when at the seashore, sunburn so readily? Why is white clothing 
so appropriate in hot weather? Why is mercury used in thermometers? Does the 
bore of the mercury column affect the height of the colimm? Explain the appli- 
cation of atmospheric pressure to the use of air brakes. Is it probable that the 
pressure of the atmosphere has always been about as it is at the present? 

REFERENCES 

Davis, William M.: "Elementary Meteorology,^' Chapters I, II and III. 

Hann, Julius: "Handbook of Climatology," Chapters I and IV. 

MiLHAM, Willis J.: "Meteorology," Chapters I, II, III and IV. 

Moore, Willis L.: "Descriptive Meteorology." 

NuNN, Roscoe: "Stories of the Atmosphere." — Yearbook, U. S. Dept. of Agri- 

cuUnrCy 1915, p. 317. 
Waldo, Frank: "Elementary Meteorology," Chapters I, II, III, IV and V. 
Ward, R. Db C: "Practical Exercises in Meteorology." 



CHAPTER IV 

General Movements of the Atmosphere 

Cause of Circulation. — It was said of old, "The wind bloweth 
where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst 
not tell whence it cometh and whither it goeth."^ Much has been 
learned regarding the winds since these words were spoken and 
today the cause and the course of atmospheric movements are quite 
well understood. 

Here, as elsewhere, we should draw upon our actual experience in 
our efforts to advance our knowledge. You have observed many 
times, in opening a door conneqting a warm and a cold room, that the 
air moves into the warmer room. Step into a cave or a tunnel on a 
warm day and you feel the air blowing outward against your face. 
When there is a fire in a room the air moves toward it from all parts of 
the room. The movement is well shown by a bonfire. The air moves 
in toward the fire from all sides and ascends in a column above it as 
is shown by the movement of the smoke, flame and small pieces of 
partially burned material. We may say that difference in temperature 
is a cause of atmospheric movement. 

As air warms, it expands and therefore a given volume exerts less 
pressure than it did before being warmed. The colder air surrounding 
a heated area, exerting greater pressure, volume for volume, than does 
the warmer air, pushes the latter out of the way. This explains the 
rising of the air over a bonfire. We see then that the surface movement 
of the air is toward areas of decreased pressure. Difference in pressure 
is another cau^e of atmospheric movement. Areas of low pressure are 
practically always areas of high temperature. Some exceptions will 
be noted later. 

Isotherms. — Were the angle at which the sun's rays strike the 
earth the only factor in determining temperature, all places on a given 
parallel would register the same degree of heat. This is far from being 
true, however. A line connecting places having the same average 
temperature for a" given period is called an isotherm^ or an isothermal 
line, from the Greek isos, equal, and therms^ heat. As land heats and 
cools more rapidly than does water, that is, as it is a better conductor, 

^ Bible. John 3:8. 
4 49 



so 



Geography 




hi 
o 



o, 

e3 

s 



a 

o 

■♦a 
O 
a 



eS 

a 

OS 



C4 

d 



Genebal Movements of the Atmosphere 



61 




52 Geography 

isothermal lines are much more irregular upon the land than they are 
upon the ocean. 

An annual isothermal chart shows the mean annual temperatures 
of coimtless places, but it tells comparatively little regarding the 
climates of these places. By means of a January and a July isothermal 
chart the seasonal ranges in temperature may be ascertained. The 
isotherms on a daily weather map show the location of the warm and 
cold areas for the given day. 

Isobars. — ^Lines connecting places having the same barometric 
pressure for a stated time are called isobars^ from the Greek isos, equal, 
and baros, weight. The average height of a column of mercury which 
can be sustained by atmospheric pressure at sea level is 30 inches. 
Therefore the average reading of the barometer at sea level is 30 
inches, or 76 cm. Isobaric lines represent isobaric surfaces. 

The atmosphere always moves from areas of higher to areas of 
lower pressure. The greater the difference between the pressure of 
two adjacent areas, the more rapid will be the resulting movement of 
the atmosphere. The difference in pressure is known as barometric 
gradient. A daily weather map shows the location of the high and 
low pressure areas for the given day. 

Trade Winds. — ^As the equatorial belt is permanently warmer 
than the temperate zones, we have a permanent or constant move- 
ment of the atmosphere toward the equator. This movement, which 
takes place from both the north and the south sides of the equator, is 
known as the trade winds. 

For himdreds of years information concerning the winds on this 
belt has been accumulating. Much of this knowledge is represented 
by Fig. 16. From about the thirtieth parallel north and south of 
the equator there is a strong and steady movement of the atmosphere 
equatorward. Strictly speaking, the margins of these wind belts are 
not parallel circles and they are subject to much fluctuation. They 
shift poleward during the summer and equatorward during the 
winter. There is less change in position over the ocean than there is 
over the land. Owing to the deflective influence of the earth's rota- 
tion these winds blow from the northeast in the northern and from 
the southeast in the southern hemisphere. 

After Columbus left the Cape Verde Islands on his memorable 
first voyage he had but to persist in his effort to find land by sailing 
westward in order to make its discovery certain. Day after day 
beneath bright skies his ships were driven before this steady wind, 
which followed the same general course before the dawn of creation. 



General Moveuents of the Atmosphere 



54 



Geography 




o 

,£5 



B 

o 

•c 

00 



3 



6 



General Movements o 



B Atmobpuebe 



55 



That this wind was to waft them to certain death rather than to a 
wonderful discovery, the sailors of Columbus were convinced. The 
constancy of these winds is illustrated by the fact that in the West 
Indies they prevail for 79 per cent, of the year, and cause all vegeta- 
tion to lean to the westward. 

Doldrum Belt — The northern and southern divisions of the 
trades meet in a belt which encircles the earth on either side of the 
equator, but lying chiefly to the north of it, because of the greater 
amount of land in the northern hemisphere. This is known as the 
doldrums, or belt of calms. It is a calm belt in the sense that there is 
little horizontal movement of the atmosphere. The heated au- is 




steadily rising, being displaced by cooler, heavier air. Vessels are 
often becalmed in trying to cross the doldrums. 

Within this belt lies the thermal equator, or line connecting the 
points which permanently have the highest temperature. The 
thermal equator, the doldrums and the trades, following the apparent 
movement of the sun, shift northward during summer in the northern 
hemisphere and southward during winter in the same hemisphere. 

Anti-Trades; — The air that rises over the belt of calms cools as it 
ascends, and divides into two streams, one flowing northward and the 
other southward. Only upon the tops of the most lofty mountains are 
they felt, although drifting clouds show their existence. At about 
30 d^rees north and south of the equator these air currents descend, 



56 Geography 

producing what are known as the horse latitude belts. While the 
doldrums is an area of low pressure, the horse latitude belts are high 
pressure areas, for here relatively cold air is settling. 

Westerlies. — From about the parallels of 30 degrees north and 
south of the equator to the poles the prevailing wind is the westerly. 
In accordance with FerreFs Law these winds blow from the south- 
west in the northern, and from the northwest in the southern hemi- 
spheres. They lack the constancy of the trades. In Boston they prevail 
for 20, in Detroit for 31 and in San Francisco for 38 per cent, of the time. 

As the westerlies sweep poleward they acquire a spiral movement 
about either pole known as the circumpolar whirl. Although the 
temperature is very low, these are areas of low barometric pressure. 
It is believed that the conditions are analogous to those in a wash 
basin when the water is caused to whirl about the opening in the 
bottom. The whirling air, rising, reduces the pressure. Andr^, the ill- 
fated explorer, trusted to this air current to bear his balloon directly 
to the north pole. As he never returned from his voyage, his exact 
fate is imknown. 

The air, rising above the poles, moves equatorward and settles 
to the surface in the horse latitude belts. From this latitude to the 
equator it enters into the regular trade wind. Thus we have a 
complete circulation. 

The Monsoons. — ^A given amount of insolation applied to equal 
areas of land and water will raise the temperature of the former about 
four times as much as that of the latter. During the summer the 
temperature of the land is higher than that of the water, as the 
isothermal charts show. There is, at this season, a marked barometric 
gradient between the water and the land, and as long as this condition 
exists the air moves toward the land. The great peninsula of India is, 
during the northern summer, an area of low pressure, while during the 
winter it is an area of high pressure. 

Seasonal changes in the direction in which the atmosphere moves 
result from these seasonal changes in temperature and pressure. 
These periodic movements of the atmosphere were long ago given the 
name of monsoon^ meaning season. Dvu-ing the summer the barome- 
tric gradient is so marked that air is drawn from south of the equator. 
As it travels north of the equator the influence of the earth^s rotation 
deflects it to the right so that it becomes a southwest wind. 

The summer moonsoon causes a very heavy rainfall on the western 
slope of the Western Ghats and a much heavier rainfall on the 
southern slope of the Himalayas, amounting in one district to about 




Fig. 17. — Winds and pressure in India in July. 




Fig. 18. — Winds and pressure in India in January. 



58 Geography 

forty feet per year, and a maximum of fifty feet has been recorded. 
India's 300,000,000 of people are in large measure dependent upon 
the summer, or wet, monsoon. While India is the great monsoon 
region of the world, these seasonal winds are well developed along the 
coast of Australia, the Gulf of Guinea and in Mexico. 

Land and Sea Breezes. — Close to the margin of the sea there is a 
diurnal change in temperature and pressure. This gives rise to diurnal 
changes in the movements of the atmosphere. During the hours of 
sunshine, the low pressure is upon the land and this causes an expan- 
sion of the air near the surface of the land. This expanded air is 
forced upward and flows out to sea as an upper current. This increases 
the pressure locally over the ocean and therefore there is a sm*face 
movement of air toward the land — ^the sea breeze. During the night 
low pressure is transferred to the ocean and the air flows from the land. 
This movement is the land breeze. 

The land and sea breezes are purely local, although in places they 
are felt at least fifty miles from the coast. The greater the diurnal 
range in temperatm-e the greater their strength. The sea breeze 
is one of the powerful factors in producing the very delightful climate 
of the coastal regions of California. 

Along the shores of our Great Lakes there are similar diurnal 
movements. Twenty miles west of Chicago the lake breeze is often 
very noticeable on a hot afternoon. As it beats back the prevailing 
west wind the temperature suffers a most remarkable drop. Its 
influence is seldom felt until after noon. 

Mountain and Valley Breezes. — There is another diurnal change 
in atmospheric movements of some importance in moimtainous 
sections, namely the mountain and valley breezes. As the lower 
layers of the atmosphere in the valley are warmed during the day the 
isobaric surfaces rise, producing at their outer edges a barometric 
gradient toward the mountains. This causes a well-marked current 
of air up every valley and canyon. From a mountain top one may 
often see during the morning hours a great billowy sea of fog covering 
the valley. As the temperature rises the fog rolls toward the moun- 
tains, beating against the foothills and sending white streams drifting 
up each canyon. As the fog reaches the mountain top it is dissipated 
in the expanded air. 

During the night the cold, dense air slides from the moimtains 
down into the valleys. In this case the descent is aided by gravity 
and by the expansion of each valley at its lower end. The mountain 
breeze is therefore usually much stronger than the valley breeze. 



General Movements of the Atmosphere 69 

This movement of the atmosphere has a tendency to prevent 
frost on the foothills and to cause it on the lowlands. The rapid 
drainage of the air in the first case, and its relative stagnation in the 
second, explains this. Upon these so-called frostless areas certain 
crops can be grown more successfully than in the valleys. 

The classes of winds, treated above are rather constant or else 
occur at stated intervals. There is another class of atmospheric 
movements which are in no strict sense regular in their occurrence, 
although they are governed by well-known laws. These movements, 
which are known as. periodic winds or storms, are dealt with in the 
next chapter. 

Frank Demister Sherman says of the winds: — 

The steady wind that fills the ship's white sail, 

And turns the mighty millwheel when it blows, 
Once breathed a love song to the nightingale, 

And wafted him the perfume of the rose. 
Let him who seeks a godlike man to find, 

Think of the wind, and seek its counterpart. 
The tempest's strength, matched by a noble mind, 

The zephyr, by a pure and gentle heart. 

STUDIES 

How do the isotherms in the southern hemisphere differ from those in the 
northern hemisphere? Explain. Upon what annual isotherm is your town 
situated? Do aU places on the same annual isotherm have the same average 
annual temperature? By means of the annual isobaric chart locate the great 
high and low pressure areas. Explain their location and their seasonal movement. 
Why is not the thermal equator parallel to the geographic equator? The western 
portions of large cities in the temperate zone are usuaUy the most desirable as 
residence sections. Why? What is the relation between the trades and the 
monsoons? Explain why the winds are deflected by the earth's rotation. Make a 
list of the wajrs in which the winds are related to man. 

REFERENCES 

Cobb, Collier: ''Where the Wind Does the Work.*' — Nat. Geog. Mag., 

vol. xvii, p. 310. 
Davis, William M.: ' 'Elementary Meteorology," Chapters VI and VII. 
Jefferson, Mark: "Wind Effects." — Jowm. of Geog. ^ vol. iii, p. 3. 
MiLHAM, Willis J.: " Meteorology," Chapter IV. 
Moore, Willis L.: "Descriptive Meteorology," Chapter IX. 
Waldo, Frank: "Elementary Meteorology," Chapters IV and VIII. 
Weller, Annie L.: "The General Circulation of the Atmosphere" — Joum. of 

Geog.y vol. x, p. 114. 



CHAPTER V 

Storms 

Any one who has observed the flow of streams knows that occa- 
sionally eddies form in them and go whirling along with the current. 
In a somewhat similar manner eddies form in the great atmospheric 
currents and are borne forward by the general movement. These 
whirls are atmospheric disturbances to which the general name of 
stmm is applied. As indicated below, storms are of various kinds. 
Weather changes are in large measure due to the occurrence and 
migration of storms. 

CYCLONES 

A temperate latitude cyclone, or as it is usually called, a cyclone, 
is a great whirl or eddy varying from 200 to 2,000 miles in diameter 
and averaging perhaps three miles in depth. Cyclones are thus only 
discs, yet the voliune of air disturbed is enormous. For example, one 
edge of a cyclone may rest on the Pacific Coast of the United States 
and the other over the Mississippi River. 

A cyclone is an area of low pressure. It is accompanied by clouds 
and generally by precipitation. Being an area of low pressure, the 
atmosphere flows in toward the center of the area as it moves forward. 
It is evident then that on the front or east side of a cyclone the air 
moves in against or in opposition to the forward movement. On the 
west side the reverse is true . 

Cyclone Tracks. — Cyclones follow rather definite tracks across 
the temperate zone and these tracks are known and charted. These 
storms originate both upon the water and the land. Those that' 
move from the Pacific Ocean to North America generally strike the 
coast in the neighborhood of British Columbia or Puget Sound. Their 
course is then southward and eastward over the Great Lakes and down 
the St. Lawrence Valley unless they die out earlier in their course. 
Some cross the Atlantic and northwestern Europe, and because of 
lack of moisture, die out in the central part of Russia. 

Temperate latitude cyclones occur at all seasons of the year. The 
blizzards of winter and the rain storms of summer are cyclones. They 
are somewhat more numerous and more violent during the winter 
than during the summer months. 
60 



Storms 61 

Rate of Movement. — The progressive or forward movement of 
cyclones is not rapid, averaging in the United States about 30 miles 
per hour, or 700 miles per day. Roughly speaking, one of these storms 
crosses the continent in about the same time required by a passenger 
train. This makes it possible to follow the progress of storms, and by 
means of telegraph, telephone and cable service, to report upon their 
conditions and movements. The whirling movement of the storms 
is much more rapid than the forward movement. 

Clouds and Precipitation. — In the case of a cyclone 1,000 miles in 
diameter it will be seen that the air that moves in from the south 
comes from warmer to cooler areas. The consequent lowering of the 
temperature as the air approaches the center of the disturbance causes 
the formation of clouds and usually leads to precipitation. 

As a cyclone approaches an area the barometer falls, the hmnidity 
increases, the wind blows from some southerly quarter, and clouds 
and precipitation may be expected. As the storm recedes the sky 
clears, the pressure rises, and the temperature falls because the air is 
being drawn in from a northerly quarter. On the rear side the tem- 
perature is often 25° F. lower than it is on the front side of the storm. 

Anticyclones. — The conditions in the atmospheric whirls that 
follow the cyclones are just the reverse of those that exist in the 
cyclones. In the central portion the air moves downward instead of 
upward. Along the surface the air moves outward in spiral form in- 
stead of inward. As already stated, the air is clear, cool or cold, and 
the pressure high. The whole disc whirls mth instead of against the 
direction in which the hands of a clock move. For these reasons this 
disturbance is called an anticyclone. 

Hot and Cold Waves.— Occasionally the areas of high and 
low pressure remain practically stationary for a time. When this 
is the case unusual weather conditions prevail. If in the summer 
there is a stationary high over our southeastern coast and a low 
in the northwest, the eastward drift of the low will be checked. 
Air will move from the area of high toward the area of low pressure, 
having its temperature constantly raised by the hot land over which 
it passes. This condition gives rise to a hot wave which continues 
until the high drifts eastward or dies out. 

If on the other hand there is a winter low in the Gulf region and a 
high over the Rocky Mountains, it is evident that the air will flow 
down the barometric gradient toward the Gulf States. This will 
carry a cold wave across the central part of our country and into 
the South. 



Fia. le.— Progress of a temperate latitude cyclon 



Fia. 21.— Same storm BhowD in Figa. IB and 20. 



Storms 65 



HURRICANES 

On Saturday morning, September 8, 1900, the City of Galveston 
was a thriving metropolis, full of life, hope and joy. When the light 
of Sunday, September 9, broke over the city, it revealed one of the 
greatest disasters recorded in human history. Aboiit one-half of the 
city was laid waste. Stores, residences, bridges, poles were floating 
in the streets or in the Gulf. In one district where on Saturday 
20,000 persons had their homes, not a single building was standing. 
Fully 6,000 persons lost their lives during the brief space of one hour. 
This terrible havoc was wrought by a hurricane or, as such a storm 
is called in Asia, a typhoon. 

From what has been said it might be inferred that this death deal- 
ing monster broke upon the city suddenly and without warning. Such 
is far from the truth. The approach of the hurricane was known for 
one week before it reached Galveston. Its progress was known, 
charted, and reported to the people from one end of the land to the 
other daily, while special reports and warnings were issued to all port 
cities. Moreover, the warnings issued by the Weather Bureau on that 
ill-fated 8th of September saved a vast amount of property and thou- 
sands of human lives. 

Resemblance to Cyclones. — ^Hurricanes, like temperate latitude 
cyclones, ju-e vast atmospheric whirls, having a progressive motion 
with the prevailing air movement in the tropical zone. They are like 
cyclones also in being areas of low pressure and in being accompanied 
by precipitation. 

Place and Time. — ^Unlike cyclones, these storms originate on the 
ocean, although many of them are destructive along the margins of 
the land. They occur in the Pacific and in the North Atlantic, but 
are absent from the South Atlantic. The West Indies, the Philip- 
pines and the adjacent coasts of South America and Asia are fre- 
quently visited by hurricanes. 

Hurricanes originate in the doldrum belt when it is farthest from 
the equator, and move with the prevailing wind, that is west, until 
they reach the latitude of 26° to 32° north, when they come under the 
influence of the earth^s rotation and recurve to the northeast. While 
they occm* at all times of the year, they are most frequent during the 
late summer and the autumn. 

In speaking of the hurricanes of the West Indies, Professor Fassig 

says: "The geographic center of origin for the entire season is in 

latitude 20° north and longitude 73° west, or just off the northwest 

6 



-« 



66 



Geography 



coast of Haiti. The average point of recurve is in latitude 28*^ north 
and longitude 82*^ west, or in the center of the Florida Peninsula. "^ 

Area. — While the a-rea covered by a hurricane is great, it is much 
less than that covered by a well developed cyclone, being from 100 
to 500 miles in diameter. The depth may be as great as six miles. 

Transmission. — The forward movement of hurricanes is not 
rapid. In the neighborhood of the West Indies it is about 14.7 miles 
per hour, while along the coast of Asia it averages but 8.5 miles per 
hour. At times this rate is exceeded. 




Fig. 22. — Average hurricane track for June, July, August, September and October. (From 
•* Hurricanes of the West Indies," by Oliver h. Fassig, U. S. Weather Bureau Service.) 



On September 27, 1882, a typhoon passed over Manila at the rate 
of 5 miles per hour. On October 1st it reached Japan and was moving 
' at the rate of 33 miles per hour. On October 3rd, when some distance 
east of Japan, its rate was 51 miles per hour. The Oregon coast was 
reached by the storm on October 10th. It crossed North America, 
the North Atlantic Ocean and disappeared in the Baltic Sea on 
November 1st, haying traveled a distance of approximately 14,000 
miles and having lasted for thirty-five days. The average rate for 
the whole distance was 17 miles per hour. This includes one week 

1 Fassig, Oliver L.: ''Hurricanes of the West Indies." — U. S. Dept, oj 
Agri. Weather Bureau BvU. X, p. 9. 



Storms 67 

during which the storm was practically stationary in the North 
Atlantic. Though the progressive movement of a hurricane is not 
rapid, the velocities attained by the whirl are very high, sometimes 
reaching 100 miles per hour. 

Description. — There are certain forerunners of these terrible 
storms which are well known to mariners. The weather conditions 
in the tropical zone are quite constant; clear sky, high temperature 
and steady east wind. At sea or along the coast the first indication of 
an approaching hurricane is a long, low swell. This is often many 
hours in advance of the storm and shows that the movement is trans- 
mitted through the water much more rapidly than through the air. 
Later indications are the appearance of lofty fleecy clouds known as 
cirrus clouds, the sultriness of the air, decreasing barometric pres- 
sure, and a lurid appearance of the sky at sunrise and sunset. A 
light wind springs up and steadily increases. Clouds grow thick 
and black. There is frequent and vivid lightning ajnd the roll of 
thunder. The wind increases to a gale, the rain falls in torrents, and 
the barometer drops rapidly. 

Presently the storm gives place to a comparative calm. The 
sea continues rough although the wind has died down. The rain 
ceases, the clouds break away, and the blue sky or the stars may be 
visible. This condition may last for a few minutes or for an hour or 
more. The calm area is known as the "eye" of the storm, and it 
varies from 10 to 30 miles in diameter. When the eye has passed 
over, the storm begins again with as much violence as before. 

As the air is being drawn in from all sides toward the vortex it 
sometimes happens that vessels caught in it are whirled round and 
round imtil they' sink. Oil is often allowed to drip on to the water 
from bags hung over the vessel's side. This has the effect of calming 
the waves because there is less friction between the wind and the 
film of oil which forms ui)on the water than there is between the wind 
and the water. 

Tidal Wave. — When a hurricane reaches the coast, the wave piled 
up by its force is greatly increased in height on account of the friction 
on the floor of the ocean. If the coast is low this great wave, improp- 
erly called a tidal wave, may rise to a height of many feet and sweep 
everything before it. It was such a wave that was responsible for 
most of the loss of property and life at Galveston. Other very destruc- 
tive waves have visited our Gulf coast. The densely populated delta 
of the Ganges has several times suffered as a result of tidal waves 
produced by typhoons^ and th^ same is true of the coast of Japan, 



68 Geography 

The energy developed by one of these storms is beyond compre- 
hension. This energy is, in large measure, drawn from the process of 
condensation. The rising air cools at the rate of 1° F. to 330 fpet of 
ascent. This cooling soon produces condensation and an immense 
amount of heat is liberated. It has been estimated that a hurricane 
100 miles in diameter and one mile high weighs as much as 500,000 
six-thousand-ton ships. The energy required to drive such a mass 
over the surface of the water is enormous. 

Cause. — ^During the northern summer the thermal equator and 
the doldrums move northward in response to the apparent north- 
ward march of the sun. Day after day the warm sunshine beats 
down upon the water, and a large part of the heat is given to the 
layer of air immediately above it. Evai)6ration is rapid, hence the 
humidity of the air is steadily rising. There is little to disturb this 
atmospheric condition, for the air is cahn. 

We have, then, warm, moist, light air lying beneath the cooler, 
drier and heavier air. This is an unbalanced condition known as 
unstable equilibrium. Occasionally the warm air appears to force an 
opening through which it escapes above, and down which the heavier 
air from above rushes. The whirl thus set up travels with the pre- 
vailing wind, and lasts imtil balance is once more restored. 

A large volume of cold water is transferred from the Antarctic 
to the South Atlantic Ocean and along the west coast of Africa. 
Probably this is the reason why the doldrums move but a short dis- 
tai^ce into the South Atlantic. In this ocean, then, there are not the 
favorable conditions for the development of tropical cyclones — ^that 
is, calm areas with high temperature, low pressure and great humidity 
— which exist in the tropical portions of the other oceans. 

The Galveston Hurricane. — In order to get a more definite idea 
of .one of these storms, let us study the Galveston hurricane of Sep- 
tember 8, 1900. On the afternoon of the 6th of September the 
barometer began to fall, and continued to fall imtil the storm had 
passed. On the morning of the 8th the tide was unusually high, and 
this fact was at once telegraphed to Washington. All day Saturday, 
Sleptember 8th, the Weather Office kept a man at the telephone send- 
ing warnings to all parts of the city, to adjoining towns and to planta- 
tions. Dr. Cline, the official in charge, made many trips to diflFerent 
sections of the city, personally urging the people to move their goods 
and to go to the higher ground. 

The progressive motion as the storm passed over Galveston was 
only about 8 miles per hour. The whirling motion was, however, 



Storms 60 

terrific. At 6.15 P. M. the anemometer registered a speed of 84 miles 
per hour for a period of five minutes, and 100 miles per 'hour for two 
minutes. The instnmient was then blown down. The estimated 
velocity of the wind at a later time is much higher than this. This is 
not the greatest wind velocity ever recorded, for at Point Reyes Lights 
on the cogst of California, velocities as high as 120 miles per hour have 
been recorded. 

The barometric pressure at Galveston at 8.30 on the evening of the 
storm was 28.48, which is a very low reading, although in the Porto 
Rican hurricane of August 8, 1899, a pressure of 27.15 inches was 
recorded. 

The work of the Weather Biffeau at this time furnished convincing 
evidence of its great value, and was commented on by papers in all 
parts of the United States. Storm warnings were displayed at all 
sea ports, and even at lake ports as the storm moved northward. 
So great was the confidence of sailing masters in the predictions of the 
Weather Bureau that few ships put out to sea, and consequently 
the loss of life and property upon the water was very slight. 

Geography of Galveston. — ^The City of Galveston is situated on 
an island of sand formed by the combined action of streams, waves 
and ocean currents. The island is about 30 miles in length, narrow 
and but a little above sea level. It \f^ this condition which made it 
possible for the tidal wave to do so much damage. 

Almost immediately after the disaster the people began to rebuild 
the city and to lay plans for the future. An imihense sea-wall of 
solid masonry several miles in length and many feet high has been 
completed. This, it is believed, will protect the city fully in case of 
any like occurrence in the future. In addition, the level of the city 
has been raised several feet. 

On August 16, 1915, Galveston was again visited by a hurricane. 
The sea-wall afforded protection on the seaward side of the island, 
but flooding which did great damage to property took place on the 
landward side. 

THUNDERSTORMS 

As has been shown, cyclones and hurricanes are storms on a gigs^- 
tic scale. The two classes of storms which remain to be considered, 
thunderstorms and tornadoes, are no less interesting although they 
are on a much smaller scale. 

Thunderstorms are very local in area, and are of short duration. 
Like cyclones and hurricanes, they have a progressive movement, 
whirl, are areas of low pressure, and are accompanied By precipitation. 



70 Geography 

Place and Time. — ^While thunderstorms occur in all parts of the 
world, they are most common in the doldrimi belt. There are both 
winter and summer thimderstorms, but they are most frequent 
during the hot spells of summer, and during the hottest hours of the 
(Jay or the evening, because at these times convectional or upward 
currents are strong and warm moist air rises until the saturation point 
is reached. 

Relation to Cyclones. — Many thunderstorms are but portions 
of some great cyclone. When this is the case, the storm, and often 
a series of them, is developed about 300 miles southeast of the 
storm center. 

Still more local thunderstorms are known as heat thunderstorms. 
They occur after a number of hot days during which the ground, and 
the air immediately adjoining, are heated up to a high temperature. 
The air over the heated area rises, carrying with it much moisture. 
Such movements are kfiown as convectional movements. Finally 
•clouds and condensation occur. Thunder clouds are usually flat on 
the earthward side because condensation occurs at the same general 
level over all parts of the ascending air column. They are irregular 
on top because where the convectional currents are strongest the air 
is carried highest and the cloud masses are carried with it. The fall- 
ing rain cools the air in the center of the column and causes it to 
descend. This colder, heavier air lifts that in the surrounding areas. 

When two clouds are charged with electricity, the air between them 
is subject to a strain. The same is true as applied to a cloud and the 
earth. When the strain becomes too great, a discharge takes place. 
This is the lightning flash which lasts from 1/300 of a second to a 
second. The electricity is rapidly carried off by the rain ; thus normal 
conditions are restored. Much of the electric energy is converted into 
heat owing to the resistance offered by the air. 

TORNADOES 

It is an interesting fact that the smallest of our storms are the most 
destructive. The tornado is very local and for its origin seems to 
depend upon (1) the presence of a cyclonic area, (2) rather high 
temperatures, and (3) great humidity. Although they are most 
frequent between April and July, these storms occur at all times of 
the year. Tornadoes are developed in the southeast quadrants of 
well marked lows. When warm, moist air rests upon the surface, 
lying beneath colder and heavier air, the conditions are favorable for 
storm development. 



Stobus 71 

Appearance. — A tornado is, in reality, an overdeveloped tJiunder- 
storm. A great mass of whirling clouds appears, usually in the south- 
westl Sometimes clouds from the northwest collide with others from 
the southwest. Hanging from the tomadic cloud mass is a funnel- 
shaped cloud in which the air ascends and whirls with great rapidity. 
A terrifying roaring sound often accompanies the storm. The diam- 
eter of the funnel is usually less than 1,000 feet. 



Fio. 23, — A tarimdo. 

Size. — A tornado is seldom more than one mile m diameter and 
is often but a few hundred feet wide. Its progressive rate is from 20 to 
40 miles an hour, but the rate of the whirl is often beyond the power 
of instruments to measure. These storms seldom last longer than one 
hour. In the narrow path pursued by one of these storms practically 
everything is destroyed. 

Distribution. — ^Tornadoes are more frequent in the central portion 
of the United States than anywhere else. They are practically un- 
known west of the 100th meridian, because the humidity is too low. 



72 Gbog»a.pht 

The name tornado was aipplied to thunderstorms on the west eoast of 
Africa more than 200 years ago. 

Frequency. — ^There is no ground for the statement, sometimes 
made, that tornadoes are decreasing owing to the settlement of the 
coimtry, nor for the opposite statement that they are on the increase. 
No obstacle which man can erect would break the force of these winds, 
as is well shown by the fact that the St. Louis tornado of May 27, 1896, 
^icoimtered several miles of great brick buildings and left the city 
with more force than it had when it entered. On the other hand the 
faciUties for spreading reports of storm havoc sometimes lead to the 
statement that they are becoming more numerous. They average in 
the United States about 45 per year, with about three particularly 
destructive ones. On February 19, 1884, there were 40 tornadoes in 
the Southern States bestween morning and midnight, and on March 
23, 1913, there were five in eastern Nebraska and western Iowa. 

Damage. — The property destroyed by these storms is great in 
value. As the tornado belt is constantly increasing in population, 
the amount of damage done is increasing. Between the Appalachian 
Mountains and the 100th meridian tornadoes destroy M4 as much 
property as do fires, while in New York State and in Pennsiflyania 
the loss is but K40 as great as that resulting from fires. 

The things which these terrible storms do are in many cases beyond 
belief. That the velocity of the whirl must approximate that of a 
rifle bullet is indicated by the fact that straws have been driven into 
trees by the wind. Chips have'been forced through limbs four inches 
in diameter. Locomotives have, been lifted from tracks; feathers 
stripped from fowls; water drawn from wells; houses catised to 
collapse, and many other equally wonderful things. ' 

Pressure. — ^As a tornado approaches a place, the barometric 
pressure falls very rapidly. This fall may be so great as to make a 
diflference of 300 pounds or more to a square foot. If a building is 
closed, the pressure cannot readily fall within the house, although it 
does without. There might then be an outward pressure of 300 
pounds per square foot greater than the inward pressure. Such a 
condition would cause the walls of the buildings to fall outward. This 
result is frequently noted. Especially is this true of the upper story, 
which is more likely to be closed than the first floor. 

St. Louis Tornado. — On May 27, 1896, the City of St. Louis was 
visited by a tornado of exceptional violence. Almost in an instant it 
destroyed about $12,000,000 worth of property and caused the loss 
of 250 lives. The pressure fell almost in a twinkling to 28.75. Here, 



Storms 73 

as in the case of the Galveston hurricane,, the people were warned 
beforehand. At ten o'clock of the day on which the storm occurred 
a telegram was sent from the central office, warning all cities in the 
central portion of the Mississippi Valley. Following this, the Chic£^o 
and the St. Louis offices issued warnings. 

Immediately upon the issuance of the warning, the school children 
in St. Louis were dismissed. The whirl in this storm was at the rate 
of 120 miles per hour. It is believed that in some storms it has 
equaled 600 miles per hour. The whirl is most violent on the right 
hand side. 

Theories. — ^There has been a number of suggestions made looking 
toward the prevention of loss of life and property through the action 
of these storms. One theory holds that they are electrical storms 
and that their destructiveness can be avoided by planting trees tb 
the southwest of the towns in the tornado belts. This suggestion is 
based on the fact that little damage has been reported from sections 
lying northeast of timber. While there is electricity in these storms, 
it is not generally believed that it is the electricity which gives them 
their chief power. The suggestion has also been made that stations 
armed with powerful dynamite guns be established, and that as a 
tornado passes within range of one of these stations it be j&red into in 
hope of breaking up the whirl. 

It seems pretty well established that the damage is the result of 
the force of the wind and the difference between barometric pressure 
within and without buildings. Probably the most powerful weapon 
which can be used in fighting this monster is the knowledge spread by 
the Weather Bureau. While the exact spots to be visited by a tor- 
nado cannot always be foretold, yet the districts in which they may 
be expected can be warned twelve to twenty-four hours in advance, 
thus enabling people to be on the watch for the approach of the storm, 
and to seek places of safety. 

STUDIES 

Why do cyclonic areas whirl anti-clockwise in the northern hemisphere? 
Why is the east side of a temperate latitude cyclone most subject to precipitation? 
Discuss the benefits derived from temperate latitude cyclones. Explain, the 
absence of hurricanes from the South Atlantic Ocean. What causes the so-called 
tidal wave? Why do so few hurricanes enter the Gulf of Mexico? At what time 
of the year are thunderstorms most frequent in your locality? Explain. Explain 
the distribution of tornadoes in the United States. 



• 



74 Geography 

REFERENCES 

Bowie, Edward H., and Weightman, R. Hanson: "Types of Storms of the 

United States and Their Average Movements. " — Monthly Weather Retnew, 

Supplement No. 1, 1914. 
Caket, J. P.: "The Central Illinois Tornado of May 26, 1917."— Geographical 

Review 4, 122. 
Davis, William M.: "Elementary Meteorology," Chapters X and XI. 
Fassig, Oliver L.: "Hurricanes of the West Indies.*' — U. S. Weather Bureau 

BuUetin X, Weather Bureau Publication No. 487, 1913. 
MiLHAM, Willis J.: "Meteorology," Chapter VI. 
Moore, Willis L.: "Descriptive Meteorology," Chapter XIII. 
Waldo, Frank: "Elementary Meteorology," Chapters IX and X. 



CHAPTER VI 

The Moisture of the Atmosphere 

General Statement. — Next after temperature, moisture is the most 
vital factor in our atmospheric environment. In the same general 
latitude we find the tropical forests of Central America, with their 
richness of lower forms of life, and the burning wastes of the great 
Sahara; the populous agricultural section of the Middle West and the 
sparsely populated dry plains west of the one hundredth meridian. 
It is evident that the amount of moisture in the atmosphere, and 
its distribution, are closely related to man's activities and welfare. 

The atmosphere *is a sort of ''middle man,'' the great distributor 
of moisture, by means of which water gets from the ocean to the fields 
and forests, the springs and wells. If the atmosphere did not perform 
the function of receiving this gift from the ocean, and tendering it 
to the land, the earth would soon become a barren waste. 

Capacity of the Atmosphere for Moisture. — ^We speak of the 
capacity of the atmosphere for moisture as we might speak of the 
capacity of a box or a pail. As a given volume of air is expanded by 
increase of temperature, and contracted by decrease, it follows that 
the capacity of the atmosphere for moisture varies accordingly. A 
room 20' x 20' X 20', at a temperature of 68° F. and air saturated, 
contains about 3.8 pints of water in the form of vapor. 

Absolute Humidity. — ^The amount of moisture which the atmos- 
phere actually contains at a given time is spoken of as the absolute 
humidity of the air. This is frequently expressed in grains per cubic 
foot. At 32° F. the maximum amount of water vapor which a cubic 
foot of air can contain is 2.11 grains. The maximum at 90° F. is 
14.79 grains. Most of the water vapor is close to sea level and 9/10 
of it is below the altitude of 21,000 feet. 

Relative Humidity. — The amount of moisture in the atmosphere, 
compared with what it could contain at the same temperature and 
pressure, is spoken of as the relative humidity. With change in 
temperature there is change in capacity, and therefore change in 
relative hmnidity. For example, the air in a room might be quite 
humid at a temperatm*e of 70°, but quite dry at a temperature of 90°. 

Proof that the Atmosphere Contains Moisture. — Place a basin of 
water in a place where it cannot be disturbed, and in a short time 
the water disappears. It has passed into the atmosphere. Place 

76 



76 Geography 

a stopper in an empty bottle and warm the bottle. Now plunge it 
into a basin of cold water. Drops of moisture collect on the inside 
of the bottle. These simple experiments prove that the atmosphere 
contains moisture. 

Variation in Humidity. — ^The relative humidity over the oceans is 
always high. In the neighborhood of the equator it averages 82 per 
cent., while in higher latitudes it is conmionly 90 per cent, or more. 
On the summit of Ben Nevis, Scotland, the mean annual relative 
humidity is 94 per cent. ; on Pike's Peak, 78 per cent. In some por- 
tions of the arid southwest it is not more than 15 or 20 per cent. 

Evaporation. — The process by which Uquids or solids are converted 
into vapor is evaporation. The molecules of water are believed to 
be in constant motion. Occasionally some, on account of very rapid 
motion, pass from the water body to the air. The nimiber of mole- 
cules passing into the air — ^that is, the rate of evaporation — depends 
upon the temperature and the hiunidity of the air. In the process 
of evaporation heat is lost, and this is known as the latent heat of 
vaporization. 

Evaporation is very rapid in an arid region. It amounts, on some 
of our desert areas, to 150 inches per year. This does not mean, of 
course, that 150 inches of water are actually evai)orated, but it is a 
statement of the possibilities of evaporation. In the tropics about 
90 inches are evaporated from the ocean per year. At the latitude 
of about 40° about 30 inches, and in polar regions only about 10 
inches are evaporated annually. 

Condensation. — ^When the movement or velocity of the molecules 
of water equals the velocity of those of the vapor, the process of 
evaporation ceases and condensation occurs. In other words, a fall 
in temperature diminishes the capacity of the atmosphere for water 
vapor, increases the relative humidity, and saturation occurs. The 
dew point is the temperatiire at which the invisible particles of 
moisture collect and become visible. 

FORMS OF PRECIPITATION 

Dew. — Perhaps the most common form of precipitation is dew, 
for it occurs in most regions every night. The earth rapidly radiates 
its heat at night, and this cools the atmosphere resting on it. Its 
relative hiimidity steadily increases until the saturation point is 
reached. As the blades of grass and leaves of trees and plants cool 
more rapidly than the air, much dew collects on vegetation. 

There is much variation in the amount of dew that collects on 



The Moisture of the Atmosphere 77 

areas not fsr apart. Dew may be abundant in the bottom of a di<^h. 
and much less abundant on the bank. This is tecause the air in 
the ditch is more humid, and also more quiet. A cloudy night is 
unfavorable to the formation of dew because the clouds check radia- 
tion, hence the fall in temperature is slow. 

While dew is of some value to vegetation, its value is frequently 
overestimated. In Central Europe the amount of dew in a year 
amoimts to about one inch, or three per cent, of the total yearly 
radnfalj. Dew often protects vegetation from freezing, for the drops 
of water hinder a further loss of heat through radiation. 

That dew does not fall can be shown by inverting a bowl on a box 
or a cement walk at night. Moisture will be found on the inside of the 
bowl in the morning. Most dew is moisture taken directly from the air 
through cooling, but some dew is formed through the transpiration of 
plants. A great deal of moisture is being returned to the air in this way. 

Fog is another common form of precipitation. It forms along the 
surface of the earth, particularly in low damp places, because the air 
reaches the saturation point. The very presence of the fog tends to 
hinder its increase near the surface, but as its upper surf ace loses its heat 
the air resting upon it is chilled, and so the fog layer grows upward. 

While fog is, to a certain extent, a benej&t to vegetation, it is 
in some sections a menace to life.* OjBf the Newfoundland Banks 
f<^ are very frequent and dense. There are about 165 foggy days 
per year in that region, and as a result many ships and human lives 
are lost yearly. These dense fogs are, in part at lefast, due to the 
melting of icebergs in this vicinity. In Southern California bean 
growers often suffer a serious loss if a number of foggy days occur 
immediately after the crop has been planted, as the seeds then rot 
in the ground. 

As each particle of dust in the atmosphere serves as a center for con- 
densa^tion, fogs are often frequent in the vicinity of large cities. This is 
notably true in London, where they cause great expense for increased 
lighting and fuel. " It has been estimated that the cost of gas burned 
during one day of an ordinary London fog approximates $15,000."^ 

Clauds are particles of moisture, sometimes water and sometimes 
snow and ice, that have collected and become visible. They are 
commonly formed by air masses ascending, cooling and expanding 
as they rise. They are also formed when air masses come in contact 
with a cold mountain top, and by the mixture of air at different 

1 Ward, R. DeC: "CUmate," p. 320. 



78 Gboorapht 

temperatures. It is found by actual experiment that there is more 
dust in clouds than in unclouded air at the same altitude. Hence 
it seems clear that clouds are often formed as a result of ascending 
sit taking up dust with it. The particles of water in a cloud vary 
from 1/4000 to 1/1000 of an inch in diameter. 

Kinds of Clouds. — The four important classes of clouds are: 
cirrus, or lofty fleecy clouds; stratus, or those arranged in layers; 
cumulus, or the banked masses; and nimbus, or rain clouds. Clouds 
vary in height from a few hundred feet to several miles. They are 



most abundant between the altitudes of one-half mile and one mile. 
As clouds furnish the earth with its precipitation, as they influence 
the distribution of insolation, and as they are aids in the forecastii^ 
of the weather, their importance is evident. 

Frost occurs at temperatures lower than 32° P. The results of 
frost are seen on lowlands before they are apparent on adjacent 
higher ground. Air at moderate elevations, being relatively dry, 
cools more rapidly than that at lower levels. This colder heavier 
air drajns to lower leveb, increasing the probability of frost there. 

The nature of the cooling substance has much to do with the 
formation of frost. For exunple, the rails of a track and the ties 
are often coated with frost when none can be seen on the ground in 
the immediate vicinity. In the bottom of a ditch two feet in depth 



The Moisture of the Atmosphere 79 

one can frequently find frost when none can be seen on the banks. 
Windy and cloudy nights are not favorable to the formation of frost. 

The Weather Bureau is of great assistance to farmers and fruit 
growers, for it warns them of approaching frost. Special bulletins, 
telegrams and telephone messages are issued in order to give the 
greatest number of persons warning. The cranberry, com and 
orange growers are among those who reap the greatest benefits. Some 
orchardists build fires on the windward sides of their orchards so 
that the smoke may drift over them and thus check radiation. In 
California it is common to place imder the trees in the grove heaters 
in which crude oil is burned. Frosts in Florida are much more 
destructive than in California because of the fact that there is nothing 
to obstruct the movement of a cold wave when it starts toward the 
Gulf. Cranberry growers protect their crops by flooding the land. 
Cultivation, drainage and placing a layer of sand upon the soil also 
* check frost. 

Frequently the greatest damage results from the increase in 
temperature following the frost. The rise in temperature after 
sunrise may be more rapid than the fall in temperature of the night 
before. The resulting expansion of the tissues or the fruit of the 
plant Is injurious. Spraying the plant with cold water checks the 
increase in temperature. A cloud of smoke has the same efifect. 

Snow. — Snow occurs when the condensation point is below 32° F. 
but not low enough to produce pellets of ice. , As the capacity of 
the atmosphere for moisture rapidly decreases with decrease-in 
temperature, snowfall is not so heavy in regions of Exceedingly low 
temperature as in those of somewhat more moderate temperature. 

At different points along the same vertical section of a storm it 
may be both rsining and snowing. Within a few hours it is possible 
to pass from a rainstorm in the valley to a heavy snowstorm on the 
mountains. 

Snow is directly related to human affairs in many waj^. Years 
ago a great snowstorm often completely blockaded trains, hindering 
their movement for days. Powerful rotary snow plows now offer a 
very effective means of keeping tracks reasonably free from snow, 
yet there is often much delay. When the snowfall is unusually heavy 
and long continued, it costs such cities as New York and Chicago 
thousands of dollars to remove it from their streets so that traflic 
can be carried on. 

The cattle men on the Great Plains suffer heavy loss when the 
ground is covered with snow for a number of days, for ordinarily 



80 Geography 

the cattle secure their living out of doors even during the winter. 
The lack of heavy snowfall on these plains is due to their dryness, 
and to the dry and relatively warm Chinook winds which come down 
the eastern slope of the Rocky Mountains. On the western side <rf 
the mountains these winds are moist, and there moet of their moisture 



Fig. 2fi.— RaktJon ol sQOW to man, ParadiBe Valley- 

is precipitated. As a result of precipitation much heat is set free, 
hence the winds as they pass over the mountains do not reach aa 
low a temperature as they otherwise would. The descending wind 
is remarkably dry. It is also warm because of the compression 
due to the descent. Under the influence of this wind snow rap- 
idly disappeai^. The Chinook is, therefore, a wind having great 
economic value. 

Snow is of great value in preventing plants from winter-killing. 



The Moisture of the Atmosphere 81 

Wheat sown in the fall is not likely to produce a good crop if the 
ground is bare much of the time during the winter. Trees and other 
forms of plant life are more likely to be destroyed by frost when there 
is little snow, for the frost can theii penetrate to great depths. 

Snow being a poor conductor, heat is slowly radiated from the 
earth to the air when snow covers the ground. Animals and human 
beings have often escaped death from freezing by crawling under a 
bank of snow. "The Scotch black-faced sheep, valued for its sweet 
mutton rather than for its coarse carpet-making wool, are found 
alive but emaciated after three, four and five weeks' biu*ial in a snow- 
drift. When the shepherd is at length able to dig them out, he finds 
that they have subsisted upon their own breast-wool and such portions 
of heather and heather-root as could be reached without moving 
more than their heads."^ 

In arid regions the snow which falls on the mountains is of great 
benefit. Every foot of snow there collected means, on the average, 
an inch or more of water for an equal surface in the valley below. 
If snow is compact, a foot will make more than one inch of water. 

The amount of snow on the ground has much to do with the tem- 
perature of the air. Until all of the snow has melted the ground 
cannot gain a temperature higher than 32° F. Hence late springs 
result when there is much snow on the ground. 

Hail is frozen raindrops. Hailstorms occur chiefly during our 
warmest, weather. At such times, owing to the intense heating of 
the ground and consequently of the air adjacent, ascending currents 
rise to a great altitude. When condensation occurs, the drops of 
water cannot overcome the upward movement and so are carried 
to greater altitudes. Here the drops freeze and finally fall. An 
ascending current of unusual force takes the pellets of ice up once 
more. Here the moisture on the outside freezes, forming a second 
coating or layer of ice. This may be repeated a number of times 
until the hailstones become too heavy to be carried up again. 

If one breaks open a number of hailstones some of them usually 
show this banded structure. Hailstones are frequently of such 
size as to do great damage, especially to growing crops; and cattle 
have been killed by them. 

A hailstorm of great violence occurred in southwestern Nebraska 
on August 8, 1917. Much damage was done to crops, poultry, pigs, 
cattle and horses. The storm track was about 92 miles in length and 



* Hunter, J. A.: "Wool," p. 7. 
6 



82 Geography 

• 

from 4 to 12 miles in width. A photograph was taken showing the 
hailstones and also some apples which had been knocked from 
the trees by the storm. So nearly of the same size were the apples 
and the hailstones that in a photograph it is not easy to distinguish 
between t hem. ^ 

In France and Italy there are many stations equipped with guns 
which bombard hailstorms when they approach the vineyards. The 
point seems to be to break up the ascending currents, thus changing 
the hailstorm into a rainstorm. It is not generally believed by 
scientists that this method is of value in preventing the storms. 

Rainfall. — ^Rain is the form of precipitation in which man is most 
interested. The distribution of forests, the success of agriculture, 
the nature of the crops, the density of population, the construction 
of railroads, and, in short, the prosperity of the human race generally, 
depend in no small measure upon the amount and the distribution 
of rainfall. " In Kansas and Nebraska, in 1900, the value of one rain, 
lasting twenty-four hours, in saving the corn crop was put at over 
$80,000,000.'^* No sharp line can be drawn between mist and rain. 
Raindrops vary from .03 to .2 inch in diameter. 

In general, a region in which the annual precipitation averages 
less than twenty inches will be one in which agriculture, if carried on 
at all, will depend upon irrigation. Much, however, depends upon 
the distribution of the rain and the nature of the soil. Over large 
areas in California and other western states the average rainfall is less 
than 10 inches, and yet profitable crops of wheat are grown without 
irrigation, because the rain falls during the growing period, and the 
crop has nearly matured when the dry season begins. 

The one hundredth meridian, in a general way, forms the dividing 
line betweemthat portion of our country in which the annual pre- 
cipitation is more than twenty inches and that in which it is less. 
To the east of the line agriculture flourishes; west of it, stock raising 
and mining are the leading industries. 

The study of a rainfall chart of the world is interesting and profit- 
able, it shows how great is the range in the amount of precipitation 
at different points. (1) We see that in general the rainfall decreases 
from the equatorial to the polar regions, although there are marked 
exceptions to this. (2) Rainfall decreases from the coast toward the 
interior. (3) In the tropical zone the greatest rainfall is on east 

• 

* Loveland, George A. : Monthly Weather Rev., 45, 540. 
*Ward, R. DeC: "Climate," p. 319. 



The Moisture op the Atmosphere 83 

coasts and eastern slopes of mountains, while in the temperj^te zones 
western coasts and slopes are favored. (4) The windward sides of 
mountains receive more rainfall than do the leeward sides. (5) Pre- 
cipitation increases up to a certain altitude and then decreases. In 
the temperate zone this varies from 6000 to 7000 feet. (6) In the 
doldrimis rainfall is abimdant on both sides of the mountain ranges. 
(7) The hot deserts lie within and adjacent to the tropical zone. 

The following illustrations of the distribution of rainfall are 
instructive: On the west coast of the Scandinavian Peninsula the 
maximum mean annual precipitation is more than 100 inches. On 
the opposite coast it is from 50 to 60 inches. Localities on the west 
coast of Scotland receive more than 200 inches of rain per year, 
while on the east coast the maximum varies from 60 to 80 inches. 
On the northeastern coast of the island of Hilo (Hawaiian Islands), 
the maximmn annual rainfall is 350 inches. On the west coast the 
maximum^ is less than half of this. 

The heaviest recorded rainfall occurs in India. Here, northeast 
of the Ganges basin, 600 inches, or 50 feet, have been recorded in a 
year, while the average precipitation is 474 inches. Over 400 inches 
of the total fall between May and September. On the plateau of the 
Deccan the precipitation is so slight that people have irrigated the 
land for ages. 

The great rainfall in India is due to the southwest monsoon. 
The winds, laden with moisture, are compelled to ascend the lofty 
Himalayas, and in ascending are cooled to such an extent that most 
of their moisture is lost on the south side. On June 14, 1876, forty 
inches of rain fell in twenty-four hours, or an amoimt as great as the 
average annual precipitation in New York City. 

A rainfall of 29.5 inches in twenty-four hours is recorded in Japan. 
In New London, Connecticut, 11.8 inches of rain fell during a period 
of twenty-four hours. At Juana Diaz, on the Island of Porto Rico, 
11.20 inches of rain fell between 6 a.m. August 8, 1899, and 6 a.m. 
of the following day. 

For reasons that are apparent, no very definite information can 
be had as to the precipitation on the ocean. The following is an 
approximation to the truth as applied to rainfall on land : 

6 per cent, of the surface receives over 75 inches yearly. 
16 per cent, of the surface receives over 50-75 inches yearly. 
25 per cent, of the surface receives over 25-50 inches yearly. 
30 per cent, of the surface receives over 10-25 inches yearly. 
20 per cent, of the surface receives less than 10 inches yearly. 



-w: : v'JTTTr 


■i. ■ 




II 

11' 

!i 

M 


- 


' i 
\ \ 


■-- w 


' ". 


'^^ 




IX ■ ' 


THE 


! : • <■■'- 1 : ^ 


; .. , . ; ;- 



The Moisture op the Atmosphere 85 

Rainfall in North America. — ^The northwestern and the southern 
coasts of North America are most abimdantly watered. The first 
mentioned area receives its rain from the westerlies. There is a 
marked increase in the rainfall as one travels from south to north. 
At San Diego, California, the normal annual precipitation is 10 
inches; at Los Angeles, 15 inches; at San Francisco, 25 inches; along 
the Washington coast, about 100 inches; at Sitka, 111 inches. This 
increase is due to the fact that with increase in latitude there is a 
decrease in mean annual temperature and an increase in the length 
of the wet season, ' The region east of the Rocky Mountains gets 
much of its moisture from the Gulf of Mexico. 

Fluctuations in Rainfall. — ^The statement is often made that the 
rainfall is increasing or diminishing. The only basis for such state- 
ments is the result of observations extending over a long period of 
time. Such records indicate that there are 35-year i)eriods of fluctua- 
tion in rainfall, but do not,, as a rule, show any continuous increase 
or decrease in precipitation. 

The intensity of the range increases toward the center of the 
continents. In Central Siberia the precipitation during the wet period 
is 2.3 times as great as during the dry. In England it is 1.2 times 
as great. During the wet period the isohyet (line connecting places 
of equal annual precipitation) of 24 inches extends 1,000 miles farther 
inland in Asia, and 700 miles farther in North America than it does 
during the dry period. 

Rainfall and Forests. — ^There has been much discussion as to the 
relation between rainfall and forests. Many have maintained that 
forests increase the precipitation. The consequence has been mis- 
taken for the cause. Abundant precipitation increases plant growth, 
but there is little evidence that forests induce rain. Theoretically, 
since the leaves of the trees cool more readily than does the atmos- 
phere, forests should increase precipitation. The records in some 
parts of the world indicate that this is the case, but the records in 
other areas do not. 

Production of Rain by Artificial Means. — ^The question of pro- 
ducing rain by artificial means is one of great interest in arid regions, 
and has called forth much comment. One should not credit or dis- 
credit statements concerning the matter without having some definite 
knowledge along this line. 

A number of years ago extensive operations were carried on in 
Texas and other sections of the Southwest. The sky was bombarded 
repeatedly, and on a very few occasions a few drops of rain fell. So 



86 GEooaA^PHY 

« 

feeble were the results that scientists are not able to tell whether they 
were the result of the bombardment or of natural consequences. 

In Southern California much attention has been given to efforts 
to produce rain by artificial means. Since in most cases rain has 
followed these efforts, they have by many people been declared 
successful. A careful study of the weather records shows that the 
conditions were not local, and leaves the impression that the experi- 
ments were in no sense responsible for the precipitation. 

It is earnestly to be hoped that science may discover how to 
wring from the atmosphere the priceless boon that it holds in its 
possession, but in all probability we shall be compelled for some time 
to come to accept the results of the operation of natural laws. 

STUDIES 

Compare the rate of evaporation on the Sahara and in the British Isles. 
Account for the difference. Shipwrecks are frequent in the vicinity of the 
Grand Banks. Why? Why does a cloudy night tend to prevent frost? At 
what season are hailstorms most common? When rain is actually faUing the 
hygrometer may show that the relative humidity is less than 100 par cent. 
Explain. Explain and apply each of the generalizations as to the distribution 
of rainfall. On cross-section paper make a graph showing the avera,ge annual 
and the yearly precipitation in your vicinity. What does a study of the graph 
bring out as to fluctuations in rainfall? 

REFERENCES 

Chamberlain, Jambs F.: ''Climatic Variation in California." School Science 

and Mathematics,/* vol. xii, p. 755. 
Douglass, A. E.: "A Method of Estimating Rainfall by the Growth of Trees." 

BiiU. Am, Geog. Soc.j vol. xlvi, p. 321. 
Grbely, a. W.: "Rainfall Types in the United States.'' Nat, Geog. Mag., 

vol. V, p. 45. 
Henry, Alfred J. : ''Rainfall in the United States." Weaiher Bureau Bulletin D. 
Henry, Alfred J.: "Precipitation and Variation in Lake Levels." Nat. Oeog. 

Mag., vol. x, p. 403. 
Herbertson, a. J.: "Oxford Rainfall Maps." 
Packard, Leonard O.: "Response to Rainfall in India." BuU. Am, Geog. Soc., 

vol. xlvi, p. 81. 
Snowfall in the United States. Climatology of the United States. Bulletin 2, 

U. S. Weather Bureau Service. 
Van Cleef, Eugene: "Rainfall Map of the United States." Rand McNally 

Company. 
Ward, Robert DeC: "Rainfall Types of the United States." Geographical 

Review, 4 : 145. 



CHAPTER VII 

The Weather and the Weather Bureau 

General Statement. — ^No matter where we may live or what our 
occupation may be, our daily lives are influenced in a multitude of 
ways by the weather. A rain may cause the postponement of an 
excursion; it drenches the clothing of thousands of persons who are 
exposed to the weather; it stops work on the farms and on the con- 
struction of buildings; it damages hay and grain; it benefits growing 
crops; it is an opportunity for many country boys to go a-fish- 
ing. When it is very hot, people are lacking in energy, and real 
Tvork, whether physical or mental, is carried on with diflSculty. 
A cold yvrave puts vigor into people and serves as an excel- 
lent tonic. 

An unseasonable frost or a drought may injure the com crop to 
the estent of hundreds of thousands of dollars. A blizzard may 
work havoc on the cattle ranches in northwestern United States and 
southwestern Canada, and temporarily tie up traffic on the railroads. 
The melting of snow due to the passing of a warm wave may cause 
a disastrous flood on the Mississippi or the Ohio. A tornado may 
cause the loss of millions of dollars worth of property in a single city. 
A storm or a fog at sea may result in the loss of several ships. " The 
state of the weather sometimes fixes the load of an engine, as in the 
case of freight trains running west from Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. 
According to the weather forecast of favorable, reasonably good, 
bad, and very bad weather, the load of a freight engine varies from 
1750 tons to 1225 tons."^ These are some of the many ways in 
which weather influences our daily lives. 

Because of the vital relationship between weather conditions 
and human beings, man has for ages observed the sky and the 
winds closely in order to guard, in such a manner as he might, his 
flocks, herds and crops. Such knowledge and supposed knowl- 
edge as he has in this way acquired has been handed down from 
generation to generation in the form of terse sayings or 
weather proverbs. 

» Ward: "Climate,'' p. 315, 

87 



88 Geography 

By weather is meant the atmospheric conditions that prevail at 
some particular period of short duration. Thus, we speak of the 
weather today, or as it was last week or last month. When our 
statements apply to a long period of time, as a year or a number of 
years, we use the term climate. 

In a given place there is a regular diurnal variation in weather 
conditions due to the rotation of the earth and a seasonal variation 
due to revolution. These being regular, are anticipated and we 
govern ourselves accordingly. The weather changes whjch most 
vitally affect us are those which, while frequent, do not occur at 
regular intervals and whose intensity can be known beforehand 
approximately only. To make known as far in advance* as possible 
the time and the character of these weather changes is an important 
work of the Weather Bureau. 

When it became known that storms have a progressive movement, 
that they follow the same general course and at an average rate of 
speed, it was evident that weather conditions could be foretold. 
A prediction or forecast could be of no value, however, unless it 
could be transmitted at a rate greater than that at which the storms 
themselves travel. It was not until after the invention of the tele- 
graph, therefore, that a weather service could develop. The begin- 
nings of the service in our country were laid by the work of Franklin, 
Espy and Redfield. 

In 1870 the United States Government organized the work. 
Ours was the fourth nation to take such a step, France, Holland and 
Great Britain having preceded us in this important matter. Our 
service is a branch of the Department of Agriculture. In 1870 
Congress appropriated $20,000 for carrying on the work. For the 
year ending June 30, 1916, the appropriation amounted to $1,666,050. 
This is a larger sum than is spent for the same purpose by all of the 
countries of Europe combined. 

Making and Distributing the Map. — Each morning and even- 
ing, at 8 o'clock (Washington time), trained observers in some 
200 Weather Bureau stations in all sections of the United States 
carefully observe and record the conditions of the weather. From 
each of these stations the reports are telegraphed to each station 
where a map is issued. About an hour after receiving the 
reports, a map showing the existing conditions, and giving a 
forecast for the 36 hours immediately following, is ready to be 
mailed to interested persons. At the Washington office two maps 
are issued daily, but at other stations but one. These maps are 



The Weather and the Weather Bureau 89 

sent to post offices, libraries, schools, commercial bodies, farmers, 
fruit growers and others. In addition, the map is now published 
in a large number of daily papers. The commercial map Is pre- 
pared at about 100 stations, and through the Postal Service is very 
widely distributed. 

The forecast printed on a card is mailed to a very large number 
of farmers and other interested persons, and is published in about 
2000 daily papers. In addition, cars are often placarded so that as 
the trains rush through the farming districts the farmers may read 
the forecast. A system of locomotive whistles is sometimes employed, 
and information is constantly being distributed by means of tele- 
graph and telephone. From a few places in the United States 
forecasts are now distributed by wireless. 

People upon the water as well as those upon the land are furnished 
this information concerning the weather. At every important sea 
and lake port in our country there are towers in which storm warnings 
are displayed. The signals are flags by day and lights by night. 
A square red flag with a black center indicates the approach ot a 
severe storm, and few captains will put to sea when they observe 
this warning. As thousands of ships of all sizes leave our Atlantic 
and Gulf ports yearly, the importance of this service can be realized. 
In 1916 storm signals were displayed at 363 different points along 
our sea coast and on the Great Lakes. 

"Forty years ago mariners depended on their own weather lore 
to warn them of coming storms; then, although the number 
of ships plying the oceans was much less than it is now, every 
severe storm that reached navigable waters left death and de- 
struction in its wake, and for days afterwards the dead were 
cast up by the subsiding seas arid the shores were lined with 
wreckage that represented a loss of many millions of dollars. 
Happily this is not now the case; the great mass of shipping 
takes warning and rides safely at anchor in convenient harbors. '^^ 
" Formerly 75 per cent, of the loss in shipping on the Great Lakes 
was wrought by storms, whereas now, owing to the efficiency of the 
storm warnings, less than 25 per cent, of our annual loss can be 
attributed to the work of storms.''^ 

Many people today doubt the accuracy of the Weather Bureau 
forecasts. An excellent way to test the matter is to copy a con- 

Moore: "Descriptive Meteorology," p. 224. 
•Groevenor, Gilbert H.: National Geographic Magazine^ vol. xviil, p. 590. 



90 Geography 

siderable number of forecasts, say 100, and make opposite each a 
record of the weather as it actually existed on the day to which each 
forecast refers. The following statements are very instructive. 
'*The annual percentage of verification for the 12 months ending 
June 30, 1912, was 88.5, or 7 per cent, higher than m 1893."* "The 
verifications of all forecasts during the year 1914 averaged 88.4 
per cent.^'** 

Benefits Derived. — From the standpoint of value of crops in 
the United States hay ranks second. Both hay and grain are 
gften greatly damaged by rains during the harvesting season. 
When farmers know 36 hours in advance of the approach of a 
rainstorm they will not cut grass or grain and will use every 
effort to place under shelter cured hay and grain. This results in a 
great saving. 

When a severe blizzard is predicted, stockmen roimd up their 
cattle and prepare to feed them. Railroad officials put snow plows 
in readiness, and telegraph and telephone companies have their 
forces ready to quickly repair disabled lines. i 

Among the very valuable warnings are those pertaining to frost. 
The approach of a cold wave is of special importance to fruit and 
cranberry growers and truckers. In addition to the regular service 
special frost warnings are sent to several districts in each of the 
following states: North CaroUna, Florida, Louisiana, Texas, Colo- 
rado, Utah, California, Oregon, Washington, Idaho, Wisconsin. 
Ohio, New Jersey and Massachusetts. 

When a frost warning reaches the growers of citrus fruit in CaU- 
fomia, they at once prepare to protect the trees by the use of heaters. 
During December, 1912, a very severe frost occurred in CaUfomia 
which damaged oranges and lemons very greatly, the loss being placed 
at $6,000,000. Had the growers not received timely warning the 
loss would probably have been several times as great. 

When frost threatens the cranberry crop, the growers flood the 
marshes. As water is a poor conductor, the berries are protected. 
Of course the water must be drawn off within a day or two, or it 
would injure the crop. 

A large river in flood is an imcontrollable giant. Its power is 
almost irresistible. It uproots trees, tears away the banks, washes out 
bridges and sweeps along houses. Between the mouth of the Ohio 

* Yearbook U. S, Dept. of Agriculture, 1912, p. 178. 

*P. C. Day: Chief CUmatological Division, Weather Bureau. 



The Weather and the Weather Bureau 91 

and the mouth of the Mississippi there are thousands of square miles 
of land but slightly above the ordinary level of the Mississippi. The 
cities along the river, as well as country districts, suffer great loss on ac- 
coimt of floods. As floods are caused by weather conditions it is quite 
natural that the Weather Bureau should make a study of floods. 

Records of the precipitation are taken at many points in a river 
basin, and the results of the precipitation upon the river level noted. 
The depth of the snow and the results of thaws are recorded. The 
length of time that it takes high water under varying conditions to 
travel from one point to another is ascertained. Such investigations 
as these have made it possible to forecast river floods, with remarkable 
accuracy. Forecasts are now made for periods varying from one 
day to several weeks. 

"During the Mississippi floods of 1897, property to the value 
of about $15,000,000 was saved through the Weather Bureau flood 
warnings, and as much during the flood of 1903, while during the 
great flood of 1912, a saving exceeding $16,000,000 was reported. 
During a single flood in the Sacramento Valley of California in 1909 
property to the value of $300,000 was saved through the warnings 
of the Weather Bureau, and similar instances are matters of frequent 
record."* The floods along the Mississippi in 1912 were the greatest 
in the history of the country. The forecast for the highest stage at 
New Orleans was issued nearly five weeks in advance, yet it was 
absolutely accurate. 

The flood warnings enable people living in areas subject to inunda- 
tion to move their families, goods of various kinds, and live stock. 
Also it gives much opportunity to strengtheh levees at weak points. 
The time and the height of the crest at New Orleans in the flood of 
1903 was announced 28 days in advance. 

"From the data that now covers many years at a large nmnber 
of stations the following general rules have been deduced: The 
time it takes high water to pass from Pittsburgh to Wheeling is one 
day; from Rttsburgh to Parkersburg, two days; from Parkersburg 
to Cincinnati, three days; from Cincinnati to Cairo, six days; from 
Cairo to Vicksburg, seven days, and from Vicksburg to New Orleans, 
four days. The time, therefore, from Pittsburgh to the Gulf is 
twenty-one days.''^ 

The snow that falls upon the mountains adds to the water supply 

• Yearbook of the Department of Agricvlturey 1912, p. 183. 
' Moore: "Descriptive Meteorology," p. 240. 



92 Geography 

ft 

of the valley below. This is of importance to those who irrigate, to 
those who are using power developed from the streams, and to those 
interested in navigation. The Weather Bureau keeps careful records 
of snowfall. From these records the amount of water available at 
various points during the following summer is worked out. If the 
amount is to be above the average, water companies can make 
contracts for the season for larger quantities, and consequently a 
larger area can be cultivated. 

Reasons for Failure of Forecasts. — That the predictions made by 
the Weather Bureau are not always fulfilled is a matter of common 
knowledge. There are a number of reasons for this. (1) The ordinary 
storm tracks are not always followed. (2) A given storm may travel 
much more slowly or much more rapidly than the average. (3) 
Occasionally a storm dies out unexpectedly, or a new storm develops 
under conditions that do not warrant the forecasting of a storm. 
(4) Sometimes, owing to the destruction of telegraphic communica- 
tion, there is not sufficient data upon which to base a forecast. In 
spite of the many failures the work is remarkably accurate. It has 
been estimated that the United States saves $30,000,000 per year 
as a result of the work of its Weather Bureau. 

Studies are constantly being made with a view to making the 
work yet more valuable. It is believed by some that the sun spots 
exert, a marked control over weather conditions; accordingly, the sun 
is being carefully studied from this point of view. That a more com- 
plete knowledge of the upper atmosphere would help wonderfully 
in solving the problems is generally conceded. For years kites and 
balloons having meteorological instriunents attached to them have 
been sent up, and much knowledge has thus been acquired. 

It is reported by P. C. Day, Chief of the Climatological Division 
of the Weather Bureau, that the greatest altitude ever reached by 
a sounding balloon in the United States is 32.6 kilometers, or a little 
more than 20 miles. "The ascension was started at Santa Catalina 
Island, off the coast of Southern California. The pressure at the 
highest point recorded 7.4 millimeters, and the temperature — 41.8 C." 

STUDIES 

Keep a record of the weather forecast for one week, and state the number of 
days on which it was fulfilled. Why are the forecasts more accurate now than 
they were 25 years ago? Would you expect the same degree of accuracy in 
San Francisco and New York? Explain. Write a paper giving illustrations of 
the influence of the weather upon human affairs in your vicinity. 



The Weather and the Weather Bureau 93 

REFERENCES 

Dexter, Edwin G.: "Weather Influences/' 

Frankenmeld, H. C»: ''Kite Work of the Weather Bureau." Nat, Geog. Mag., 

vol. xi, p. 55. 
Grosvenor, Gilbert H.; "Our Heralds of Storm and Flood." Nat. Geog. Mag., 

vol. xviii, p. 586. 
McAdie, Alexander: "Saving the Crops From Injury by Frost." Geographical 

Review, 4, 351. 
MiLHAM, Willis J.: "Meteorology," chapters vii and viii. 
Moore, Willis L.: "The Weather Bureau." Nat. Geog. Mag., vol. xii, p. 362. 
Moore, Willis L.: "Forecasting the Weather and Storms." Nat. Geog. Mag., 

vol. xvi, p. 225. 
Weather Folklore: BiUletin 33, U. S. Dept. of Agriculture. 
Weather Folklore: Journal of Geog., vol. yi, p. 194. 



CHAPTER VIII 

Climate and Its Relations to Life 

General Statement. — Situated between the mountains and the 
sea, in southeastern France and northwestern Italy, is a narrow strip 
of land known as the Riviera. Although as far north as Chicago, the 
Riviera has a delightful winter climate. When snow and ice prevail 
in our North Central States the Riviera is bathed in warm sunshine. 
In fact frost seldom occurs in this favored land and flowers bloom 
out of doors in the winter. 

Because of the mild climate orange, lemon and olive trees are 
grown, and citrus fruits, olives and olive oil are exported. Large 
quantities of cut flowers are shipped to areas less favored climatic- 
ally and vast quantities of blossoms are used in the manufacture 
of perfumery. 

Naturally, the climate of the Riviera attracts many people from 
other parts of Europe and even from the United States. As a result, 
the winter population is much larger than the summer population. 
Millions of dollars have been expended in the construction of 
excellent roads and in the erection of splendid hotels. The enter- 
tainment of tourists is one of the most important lines of work. 

Among the tourist resorts of the French Riviera are Cannes, Nice, 
Grasse, Monaco, and Mentone. In Italy are Ventemiglia, St. Remo, 
Porto Maurino, Oneglia and others. Palatial homes, usually of 
brick or stone, nestle among semitropical trees and flowers of many 
kinds. The area is one of light rainfall, but man's response to favor- 
able temperature conditions has resulted in the very high develop- 
ment of the region. 

This illustration makes it clear that climate exerts a powerful 
control over the lives of men. It is, indeed, the most important 
factor in our geographic environment. This being true, it is evident 
that we should know the climatic conditions that exist in all parts 
of the world, the causes underlying these conditions, and the results 
of climate. 

Dr. Ellsworth Himtington has made an exhaustive study of the 

influences of climate upon human life. His study indicates that 

neither very high nor very low temperatures are favorable to the 

best physical or mental effort, and that uniformity in temperature 

94 



J 



Climate and Its Relations to Life 95 

conditions are about as deadening as extreme temperatures. Fre- 
quent storms seem to furnish favorable conditions, while very high 
and very low relative humidity discourage effort. 

Temperature is the chief element in climate as it is in weather. 
Temperature depends primarily upon the angle at which the sun's 
rays strike the earth. As the earth's axis is inclined 23J^° from a 
perpendicular to the plane of its orbit, the vertical rays of the sun 
never fall north or south of the tropics (latitude 233^° north and 
south of the equator). 

Tropical Zone Climate. — ^The tropical zone is then, as the name 
indicates, the warmest belt on the earth. Speaking of the lower 
levels we may say that the temperature is always high and subject 
to slight seasonal changes. As day and night are always nearly 
equal in duration (day in the tropical zone is never less than about 
103^ hours in duration and never more than about 13J^ hours), 
the diurnal ranges are less than they would otherwise be. 

In a large part of the tropical zone the mean annual range in 
temperature is less than 10° P. At Equatorville, on the Congo, it 
is only a little more than 2° P. At Iquitos, Peru, it is less than 5° P. 
The mean annual range in the temperature of the surface water of 
the ocean along the equator is about 4° P. The Challenger Expe- 
dition showed that the mean daily range in surface water at the 
equator is only 0.7° P. and that the diurnal range in the air over 
the ocean in the tropical zone averages from 2° to 3° P. 

The prevailing wind is the trade. Where this blows from the sea 
to the land and encounters lofty mountains, the rainfall is heavy 
and great forests result, as in large parts of equatorial Africa and 
South America. Where the trade blows from the land to the land, 
or does not encounter high mountains, desert conditions prevail, 
as in the Sahara. In the doldrums, as we have seen, the air is con- 
stantly rising and reaching the condensation point. In this belt 
heavy rainfall occurs on both slopes of north to south mountains. 

The constant high temperatures and the great humidity which 
exist in many areas are very detrimental to the development of 
man. No great nation has ever developed within the humid lands 
of the torrid zone. There is no non-productive season for which 
provision must be made. Nature is so lavish that there is little 
incentive to or need for labor. Pood in abundance is easily secured, 
and little is required by way of clothing and shelter. 

Frigid Zone Climate. — In the frigid zones the sun's rays strike the 
earth at a low angle, and hence comparatively little heating results. 



96 Geography 



Temperatures, even in the siunmer, are always low. At the poles 
day and night are synonymous with the season, each being six months 
in duration. Hence there are marked seasonal changes in temperaT 
ture. In all parts of the frigid zone there is a greater variation in the 
length of day and night than in any other part of the earth. 

Owing to the long period of sunshine during the summer, insola- 
tion in polar regions is very great. ''At the time of the simmier 
solstice, the area immediately about the North Pole receives 20% 
more heat than an equal area at the equator ever receives, and 
36% more than the equatorial region receives at the same time."^ 
As the temperature cannot be raised until the ^ow and ice are 
melted, the climate remains cold even during the summer. 

There is comparatively little land in the frigid zone, and this tends 
to reduce the seasonal variations in temperature as compared with 
what they would otherwise be. In the frigid zone Nature imposes 
such severe conditions of life upon her children that living is reduced 
to mere existence. 

In the northern part of both North America and Eurasia are 
areas where the sunmier temperature rises above 32° F. for a short 
time only. Here the ground, below the depth of two or three feet, 
remains permanently frozen. The growing of crops is prohibited 
by the short summers, and even trees are absent. The only form of 
vegetation that thrives is the reindeer moss. 

As animals depend upon plants or other animals for food, these 
regions have a limited fauna as well as flora. Here, then, there are 
no farms, no forests, no mines, no railroads, no cities — ^in a word, 
none of the conditions essential to the development of industry 
and commerce. The unfortunate inhabitants, few in number, wage 
a never-ceasing warfare with nature, and as a result secure the 
means of a bare existence. 

Temperate Zone CUmate. — ^As is indicated by the name, the 
temperate zone is the belt of the earth's surface which suffers neither 
extreme of temperature, and yet the temperature ranges are greater 
in this zone than in the others. The rays of the sun fall less directly 
than they do in the tropical zone, and more directly than they do 
in the frigid zone. Variations in the length of day and night are 
greater than they are in the tropical, and less than they are in the 
frigid zone. 

The climate of the temperate zone is subject to extremes of 

1 Salisbury, R. D.: "Physiography," Advanced Course, p. 525. 



Climate and Its Relations to Life 97 

temperature. This is in part due to the large land area in this zone. 
As snow and ice are absent, except at high altitudes, during the 
summer months, and as land heats rapidly, high temperatures 
result. During the winter the land radiates its heat rapidly, and 
this loss of heat causes low temperatures. 

These climatic conditions have led to the highest development of 
mankind. Generally speaking, the summers are not enervating, and 
the season for growth and work is long. The winters are sufficiently 
long and severe to make definite preparation for them a necessity, 
yet not so severe as to put a stop to all industry. "In the temperate 
zone all is activity'-, movement. The alternations of heat and cold, 
the change of seasons, a fresher and more bracing air, incite man 
to constant struggle, to forethought, to a vigorous employment 
of all his faculties. A more economical Nature yields nothing except 
to the sweat of his brow; every gift on her part is a recompense for 
effort on his. . . . Invited to labor by everything around him, 
he soon finds, in the exercise of his faculties, at once progress and 
well-being. "2 

Climate Upon Mountains. — ^Temperature falls on the average 
1° F. for each 330 feet of ascent. There are therefore altitvdinal as 
well as latitudinal zones. In Mexico orange, lemon, palm, and 
banana trees, coffee, cotton, sugar-cane and rice are grown within 
a comparatively short distance of mountains permanently snow- 
covered. In ascending these, and other mountains similarly situated, 
the traveler passes through all climatic and vegetation zones from 
tropical to frigid. ^ 

The summits of all lofty mountains are in the altitudinal frigid 
zone, and consequently are not climatically adapted to support life. 
The low barometric pressure on high mountains prohibits people 
in countless cases from ascending them. 

To a considerable altitude the climate of most mountains is 
moist, for their low temperatures, actual and relative, favor con- 
densation. At great altitudes little water vapor can be held in the 
atmosphere because the very low temperature reduces the capacity 
for water vapor. 

Ocean Climate. — ^The ocean, except in very high latitudes, never 
freezes. It follows from this that the layers of air close to the ocean 
have a much higher winter temperature than they would otherwise 
have. Water, being a poor conductor, warms as slowly as it cools. 

2 Guyot, Arnold: *'Earth and Man,'' p. 269. 
7 



98 Geography 

Hence the summer temperature of air adjacent to the ocean is never 
high. In other words, the climate that obtains upon the ocean 
is not subject to great extremes in temperature. It is equable — 
oceanic as opposed to continenfaL 

The seasonal isothermal charts show how slight is this range 
of temperature. As a result of the slight range, the windward coasts 
of continents and islands have equable climates. The British Isles 
furnish a striking illustration. The coastal portion of British 
Columbia, although far to the north, has a climate that is essen- 
tially oceanic. 

While rainfall conditions are not nearly so well known upon the 
ocean as they are upon the land, it seems clear that the average 
precipitation is less than upon the continents. The surface being 
uniform, one great cause of condensation is removed. The course 
of the winds is much more regular over the sea than over the land, 
for there are no surface features to deflect them. As there is nothing 
to check the winds, their velocities upon the ocean exceed those 
upon the land. 

Climate on East and West Coasts. — ^We are now in a position to 
understand why there are such great climatic variations between 
east and west coasts. The prevailing westerly winds bring to west 
coasts in the temperate zone oceanic conditions of climate. The 
same winds, after having blown across hundreds or thousands of 
miles of land surface, carry to eastern coasts continental conditions 
— that is, high temperatures in summer and low temperatures 
in winter. 

Along west coasts in the temperate zone the windward sides of 
the mountains receive an abundant rainfall, and are usually forested, 
while their leeward slopes and a considerable area beyond are de- 
ficient in rainfall. The great central valley of California and the 
eastward slopes of the Sierras and the Rocky Mountains well illus- 
trate this. 

In the tropical zone the more uniform climatic conditions and 
the more abundant rainfall are found on the east coasts, for it is 
these coasts that are first encountered by the trades as they come 
in contact with the continents. 

Climate in the Interior. — Owing to the lack of the moderating 
influence of water, climate in the interior is subject to much greater 
temperature ranges than it is on either coast. A comparison of 
the July and January isothermal charts will show this to be a 
fact. The greater the area the more variable is the climate. North 



Climate and Its Relations to Life 99 

America shows greater extremes than does Europe, and Asia shows 
greater extremes than either. 

The interiors of continents, even though not surrounded by 
mountains, are, outside of the doldrums, dryer than the coastal 
regions. The great Western Plateau and the High Plains are 
examples in our country, while Asiatic Russia is another excel- 
lent illustration. 

Permanency of Climatic Conditions. — There is abundant proof 
that much of the Great Central Plain in our country was once for a 
long period of time covered by glaciers. The same is true of western 
Europe. This shows that in these areas the climate was, during 
the glacial period, very different from what it is today. The fossil 
forms of plants and animals found in many parts of the world prove 
conclusively that great changes in climate have occurred. These 
changes represent hundreds of thousands, and probably millions, 
of years. 

That climate is subject to considerable changes within the ordi- 
nary span of human life is a very common belief. Elderly people 
are prone to state that climate is quite different from what it was 
in the days of their youth. "The records furnished by the Weather 
Bureau at San Francisco cover a period of 62 years. The mean 
annual rainfall for the period is 22.83 inches. The average annual 
precipitation for the first ten-year period is 21.84 inches; for the 
second, 26.58; for the third, 22.93; for the fourth, 25.06; for the fifth, 
20.51; and for the sixth, 21.05. The maximum ten-year average is 
about ten per cent, greater than the mean annual rainfall, while the 
minimum ten-year average is about ten per cent, less than the mean 
annual. The figures show definitely that there has been neither a 
regular increase nor decrease in precipitation."' A similar study of the 
climate of several other points in California brings out the same fact. 

It seems evident that the climate has suffered no appreciable 
change since the establishing of the Weather Bureau Service in 
this country or in any European country. It appears that the 
northern limits of the grape vine, the olive and fig trees have remained 
practically unchanged in Europe since the beginning of the Christian 
era. In speaking of the close relation between the distribution of 
these forms of life and the position of the isotherms, Shaler says^ 
"So close is this relation that meteorologists are fairly justi- 
fied in the assertion that no change in the average annual temperature 

' Chamberlain, James F. : "School Science and Mathematics," vol. xii, p. 760 



100 Geography 

of Europe to the amount of one degree Fahrenheit has taken place 
in two thousand years."* Variations in rainfall and temperature 
have occurred, but these have been in both directions from the 
normal. We may expect these variations in the future just as we 
have experienced them in the past. There is every reason to believe 
that the laws that have governed climatic conditions for untold 
centuries will continue to be operative for centuries to come. If 
the climate of a given area ever changes radically, as it may, the 
change will in all probability come about so slowly as not to be 
appreciable except by the study of written records of the change. 

STUDIES 

Why is climate such a powerful factor in the environment of man? Point 
out some ways in which man has in a measure overcome the influence of climate. 
Why do places in the same latitude have different climates? Is there any 
evidence that climate is changing? Give definite illustrations of the influencs 
of clin^te upon the life of man in your vicinity. 

REFERENCES 

Brown, Robert M.: "Problems in the Study of Climates." Jour, of Geog., 

vol. xi, p. 223. 
Chamberlain, James F.: "CUmate as Related to Industry and Commerce." 

Jour, of Geog.j vol. ix, p. 93. 
Huntington, Ellsworth: "Civilization and Climate." 
MiLHAM, Willis J.: "Meteorology," chapter ix. 
Moore, Willis L.: "Climate." U. S. Weather Bureau. 
Olmstead, a. T.: "Climate and History." Jour, of Geog.y vol. x, p. 163. 
Ward, R. DeC. : "Climate." 

^ Shaler, N. S.: "Nature and Man in America," .p. 16. 



r t» t ** 






CHAPTER IX 

Mountains and Their Relations to Life 

Distribution of Population. — ^The total area of our Rocky Moun- 
tain and Pacific Coast states is 1,120,113 square miles, or about 
one-third of the area of the entire United States, exclusive of Alaska. 
According to the census of 1920, the population of this immense 
area was but 8,899,811. 

Fig. 151 shows that nowhere in this area is the population dense. 
In fact only about 38 per cent of the total population of the United 
States is found at altitudes greater than 1,000 feet. In other words, 
mountains, as a rule, greatly restrict settlement. There are several 
reasons for this. With increase in altitude there is a decrease in 
temperature amounting on the average to 1° F. to each 330 feet of 
ascent. According to this general law, the mean annual temperature 
on the top of Mount Etna is 33j^^ F. lower than that in the city of 
Messina, not far from its base. 

As we have seen, the greater the distance from the surface of the 
earth the less the barometric pressure. At the altitude of 16,000 
feet the pressure is about one-half of the normal at sea level. Through 
the process of expansion air loses heat. As the air is warmed chiefly 
by the heat radiated and reflected by the earth, the atmosphere 
on lofty mountains receiving heat from a relatively small land area 
is, for this reason, cooler than the atmosphere near sea level. 

The highest mountains in the tropical zone rise above the snow 
line, and hence are incapable of directly supporting human life. 
The restricted areas suitable for agriculture, as well as low tempera- 
tures, discourage settlement. In Norway, owing to the mountainous 
character of the country, only about 5 per cent, of the land can 
be tilled. 

Human beings cannot endure with ease such barometric pressures 
as exist far from the level of the sea. At altitudes greater than 
12,000 feet most individuals suffer, and there are in the aggre- 
gate many persons who cannot live at altitudes of 5,000 feet above 
the sea. 

While as a rule highlands are sparsely populated, there are marked 
exceptions. In the humid parts of the tropical zone, high mountains 
present temperate or frigid conditions, according to altitude. They 
are therefore in some cases more densely populated than the plains. 

101 



102 •:._';- '•..■'•;/■; : Geography 

Atjbiit' frpCtifurili of tIj6_to£^l population of Mexico is found upon 
tKe plateau^ 'ahd* frtotihmins. The larger part of the population of 
Columbia, Bolivia, Eleuador and Peru is found at altitudes varying 
from 6,000 to 14,000 feet. 

Isolation of Mountain Peoples. — The work o£ establishing and 
maintaining roads in mountainous regions is difficult and costly. This 
isolation, with its resulting lack of contact between the people of 



Fio. 27,— Lile in the tropioal lone. 

the mountains and those of the plains, retards the development 
of mountain people. Customs and traits of character change slowly. 
Words remain in use long after they have become obsolete in the 
districts from which the people of the mountains originally migrated. 
In the most mountainous parts of our Southern States some 300 
words are in common use that have been obsolete in England since 
the sixteenth century. A very interesting illustration is found in 
Wales, where there are several hundred thousand people who cannot 
speak English. The Plateau of Tibet furnishes a very striking 
example of the influence of isolation. 



Mountains and Their Relations to Life 



103 



Mountains and Industry. — ^As has been shown, agriculture upon 
a large scale does not exist in mountainous regions. As rainfall 
increases with altitude up to 6,000 or 7,000 feet, pasturage is often 
better upon mountain slopes than it is in the dryer valleys. In some 
of the densely populated countries of Europe and Asia practically 





















/ 


















/ 


















/ 


/ 
















J 


/ 


















/ 


















/ 


















y 


/ 


















/ 


\ 
















/ 


/ 


















1 


















/ 


















1 


f 


















/ 


















J 


/ 


















/ 





















/SOOO' 

I3O00* 
iffOOO' 
//OOO' 

/oooo* 

SOOO' 
QOOO* 
70O0' 

6000.' 

SOOO 

4000' 

30OO' 

SOOO' 

WOO* 



70r 6r iff ST so* 4S'' 40' Jf JO- 2S' 
Fig. 28. — Graph showing relation between temperature and altitude. 

every bit of tillable land is needed and used. As the summer advances 
flocks and herds are driven upward to feed upon the mountain pas- 
tures. A considerable number of persons accompany the animals 
to care for them and to carry on the industrj^^ of dairying. In the 
autumn a downward migration takes place. These seasonal move- 
ments are important in Norway, Switzerland and Austria, 



104 Geography 

Where the grass is not all eaten by the animals grazing upon the 
mountains, the greatest care is used to cut and dry it and carry it 
to the bams in the vallejrs for winter use. So valuable is the crop 
that grass in the most out-of-the-way places is cut, tied up in bundles, 
and rolled down the slopes. "In Switzerland not a spear of grass 
escapes. In places inaccessible to cattle and goats, the peasant 
gathers hay by the handful, with campons on his feet, generally 
from the ledges of cliffs. He stacks it in one spot, and brings it down 
to the valley by sledge in winter."^ 

Owing to the humidity and lack of sunshine in the valleys, special 
pains must be taken to dry the grass. Sometimes the shepherd 
and his wife turn the grass with forks and rakes almost constantly, 
and sometimes it is placed upon racks or stakes driven into the 
ground. This allows the air to circulate freely about it. 

Mountains are the great storehouses of mineral wealth. During 
the process of mountain building, fissures are formed in the rocks. 
These enable surface water to penetrate to great depths where the 
temperature is high. Here minerals and metals are dissolved, and 
the hot water, working its way upward, carries them in solution. 
As the temperature of the water falls, now one substance and now 
another is precipitated. Thus mineral veins originate. 

Although a very large part of our mineral wealth comes from 
mountains, it must not be supposed that all minerals are found 
in mountainous regions. This is far from being the case. Fig. 136, 
showing the distribution of coal in the United States, illustrates this. 

It was the lure of gold which for many years following 1849 
drew people from all parts of the world to California. The gold- 
mining industry was one important factor leading to the early 
completion (1869) of the first transcontinental railroad. The great 
gold strikes in South Africa, in Australia, and in Alaska are familiar 
examples of the influence of mineral wealth upon the movements 
of people and upon industry. 

Mountains and Forests. — The increase in precipitation up to 
moderate altitudes leads, especially upon the windward slopes, to 
the growth of forests. Partly because of the relative inaccessibility 
of mountains and the distance from markets, much timber yet remains 
in mountainous districts. In some areas there is considerable local 
demand for timbers to be used in supporting the roofs and walls 
of mines. 

^ Semple, Ellen C: "Influences of Geographical Environment," p. 576. 



Mountains and Their Relations to Life 105 

Mountains and Water Supply. — Foresta upon mountains have a 
value because of the timber which they are capable of supplying, , 
and also because they are regulators of stream-flow. They check 
floods (see p. 262), and. render streams navigable for a larger part 
of each year than they would otherwise be. The more regular and 
dependable flow .of wafcer means much to those who irrigate and to 
those who develop water-power. In a smaller way mountains supply 
water to cities. New York City, San Francisco and Los Angeles, 
Rome and Vienna, are good illustrations of this. 

Floods result in the silting up of streams, thus gradually causing 
them to become unnavigable. Floods cause great loss of life and 
property, and for this reason steep slopes should not be denuded of 
vegetation. China, Italy, Spain, France and our southern Appalachian 
region have suffered because of floods which the removal of timber 
has aggravated. 

Motmtains* as Barriers. — In many cases mountains serve as 
Qatural barriers between countries. The Alps have always made 
comtnunication between Italy and the countries that surround her 
much more difficult than it would otherwise have been. To be sure, 
many invasions from the north have occurred. These were favored 
by the relatively gentle northern slope and the steep south slope 
of the mountains. The direction of movement here, as in other 
mountains, is closely related to the position and the altitude of the 
passes. The construction of tunnels through the Alps has done 
much to facilitate land commerce between Italy and the north, and 
to increase travel as well. 

The lofty Himalayas, the ^* abode of snow,'' separate India 
and China. Most of the passes are so high that they are snow-filled 
permanently. Not a railroad crosses the system, although the 
English have built a line to Darjeeling, the altitude of which is 
about 7,000 feet. From this point a wagon road leads to the 
frontier of Tibet. 

The most important mountain barrier in western Europe is the 
Pyrenees, separating Spain and France. The importance of this 
barrier is strongly brought out by the fact that there is not a railroad 
actually crossing the system. At the western extremity of the 
mountains, just back from the shore of the Bay of Biscay, is the 
Bayonne-Burgos Railroad. At the east end of the system is a 
road connecting Narbonne and Barcelona. There are several high- 
ways across the mountains. One of these passes from the valley 
of the Rio Ter on the north to that of the Segre, and makes use of 



106 Geography 

the pass called the Col de la Perche, which hae an altitude of 5,280 
feet. Another follows the route of an old Roman road from Sarsgossa 
to Oloron, using the Canfranc Pass, 7,520 feet in altitude. Along 
these routes railroads are being constructed. 

Yet another excellent example is furnished by the Caucasus 
Mountains, which form a great double wall about 750 miles in length, 
and averaging about 130 miles in width. The Terek River, which 
flows northeastward, leads, at about the middle of the system, to 



the Dariel Pass, 7,503 feet above sea level. No other pass across 
these mountains is usable during the whole year; hence its impor- 
tance has been great from the earliest times. The Russians have 
built a military road through this pass connecting Vladikavkaz 
and Tiilis. 

"The Pass of Belfort is the strategic key to Central Europe. 
Here Napoleon repeatedly fixed his military base for the invasion of 
Austria, and hither was directed one division of the German army 
in 1870 for the invasion of France. The gap is traversed today by a 



Mountains and Their Relations to Life 107 

canal connecting the Doubs and the Rhine, and by a railroad, just 
as formerly by the tracks of migrating barbarians."^ 

Motmtains and History. — ^When momitain systems extend in a 
general way at right angles to the direction of the prevailing winds 
they separate areas that differ strikingly in climate, and therefore 
in human conditions. The Sierra Nevada of our own country are 
a good illustration. The prevailing westerly winds as they strike 
the western slope of these mountains are forced to ascend, and 
in so doing chill to the point of condensation. (This applies 
almost exclusively to the winter season.) As a result, we find 
upon the western slope dense forests and lumbering as an impor- 
tant occupation. 

The abundant precipitation, amounting in places to 100 inches 
annually, gives rise to many rivers. These, although not navigable, 
furnish great possibilities along the line of water and electrical power. 
In fact much power has already been developed. The streams, 
having steep gradients, carry large loads of rock waste, and some 
of the most beautiful canyons in the world have resulted from the 
erosional work of the streams. The Yosemite Valley is but one of 
many such canyons. 

Much of the water carried westward from the Sierra Nevada is 
used in irrigating the Central Valley of California. Owing to lack 
of precipitation during the summer, vast areas now devoted to fruit- 
growing and general farming would be practically useless, and the 
population that could be supported would be very small, but for the 
transference of water from higher to lower levels. 

On the eastern side of the Sierra Nevadas, and west of the Rocky 
Mountains, stretches an immense area in which the total population 
is very small. This is a part of what was formerly known as the 
Great American Desert. The winds, robbed of their moisture on 
the west side of the mountains, blow over this area as drying 
winds. Such forms of vegetation as exist here are adapted to desert 
conditions. The same is true of the animal life. Only where water 
has been developed and irrigation is practiced, is there any 
considerable population. 

As the winds strike the high wall formed by the Wasatch Moun- 
tains considerable precipitation in the form of both snow and rain 
takes place. The water from the resulting west-flowing streams 
was, by the early Mormon settlers, carried to the lake plains lying 

^ Semple, Ellen C: "Influences of Geographic Environment," p. 540. . 



108 Geography 

west and south of Great Salt Lake. This was the first area in the 
United States to be farmed under irrigation. Our government Recla- 
mation Service has done and is still doing wonders by way of reclaim- 
ing portions of this and other arid regions in the United States. 
The same diy conditions with lack of high development are found 
east of the Rocky Mountains. "Our western mountains render 
600,000,000 acres unfit for agriculture."' 

Another instructive illustration ia furnished by the Caucasus 
Mountains. The precipitation upon the southern slope is greater 
than it is upon the northern, and owing to the sheltering influence 



of the lofty mountains, the average temperature is higher. As a 
result, we find grazing to be the leading occupation on the north. 
The population is sparse, and industry ia not developed. On the 
southern slope there are orchards of peacb. apricot and other fruit 
trees, and vineyards are numerous. Agriculture is in a fiourishing 
condition, and the land supports a considerable population. 

Mountains as Health and Pleasure Resorts. — In many parts of 
the world the summer temperatures upon mountains attract large 
numbers of persons to the heights. Not only is the lower tempera- 
ture favorable, but the low humidity and the greater freedom from 

^ Whitbcck, R. H.: Jtmmal of Geography, to!. 9, p. 54. 



Mountains and Their Relations to Life 109 

dust and other impurities, and the high percentage of sunshine, are 
conditions of great importance. Many go to the mountains to regain 
health, and a large number go as a matter of relaxation from business 
cares, and to avail themselves of the pleasures of hunting, fishing 
and mountain climbing. 

Colorado has become a national playground. Colorado Springs, 
Manitou and other places owe their importance very largely to 
climatic conditions and to near-by scenic features. Our national 



government has fully realized the importance of these natural play- 
grounds, and has set aside many areas, such as Yellowstone National 
Park, Glacier National Park and Mt. Rainier National Park, to be 
forever the property of the people of the United States. 

Switzerland is an international playground. Here every summer 
one may meet people from every comer of the earth who have come 
to enjoy the glaciers, lakes, streams, waterfalls, lofty mountains 
and the general stimulating and uplifting effect that comes from 
living amid these scenes. It has been estimated that Switzerland, 
a country about twice as lai^e as the state of Massachusetts, receives 
$60,000,000 per year from tourists. The importance of this is more 



110 Geography 

fully realized when one remembers that Switzerland is not important 
agriculturally, and that she has practically no mineral resources. 

In European Russia one may travel for hundreds of miles and 
not see a single hill to break the monotonous level of the land. This 
area is a part of the Eurasian Plain, the largest in the world. In 
our own country we find the second largest plain. The Amazon, 
between the Peruvian border and its mouth, a distance of nearly 
2000 miles, falls only about 35 feet. The Amazon Plain differs 
from the other two mentioned in that it is forested. On the other 
hand, some countries, such as Norway, Spain and Japan, are very 
mountainous. Why do we have these great areas of practically 
level land, while other regions are so rugged and broken? 

Origin of Mountains. — Mountains, because of the abruptness of 
their slopes and the altitude of their crests, are the most conspicuous 
and impressive of the physical features of the earth's surface. How- 
ever, the most lofty peak in the world (Mount Everest, about 29,000 
feet in altitude) is insignificant when compared with the radius 
of the earth. 

Where the rocks of which mountains are composed are exposed, 
as along the walls of canyons, it is seen that they are seldom in a 
horizontal position. The rocks are either folded or faulted. In 
either case it is evident that tremendous pressures have been exerted 
to bring about these results. People living in mountainous regions 
are occasionally made aware of these earth movements in the form 
of earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. Aside from these disturb- 
ances, the great movements that result in mountain systems go on 
so slowly and so quietly that the dwellers in the regions are not 
aware of them. 

Earthquakes. — ^An earthquake is transmitted in the form of 
waves which travel in all directions from the center of the disturb- 
ance, known as the centrum. This is usually several miles below 
the surface of the earth. As a result of earthquakes, cracks may 
be found in the rocks, buildings may be damaged or demolished, 
and railroad tracks may be slightly shifted. The shock travels with 
great rapidity, the velocity depending upon the density of the medium 
transmitting it. 

The frequency of earthquake shock in Japan is one of the 
several reasons for the extensive use of bamboo as a building 
material. Just as we are learning to erect fire-proof structures, 
so we are learning to erect buildings which will withstand very 
violent earthquakes. 



Mountains and Theib Relations to Life 111 

An earthquake shock originating beneath the sea would first 
reach the shore through the rocks of the ocean floor, next through 
the water, and lastly through the air. In the shore-waters a wave, 
incorrectly called a tidal-wave, is sometimes produced. This may do 
great damage to shipping and to other property close to the coast. 



Earthquakes are most frequent in those area^ which are Reolc^- 
ically young. 

When earth movements take place very slowly in a geological 
sense the rocks are likely to fold into great ridges with depressions 
between. The up-folds are known as anticlines, and the down-folds 
as syncUnes. The Appalachian and the Jura are good illustrations 
of folded mountains. When the movements take place quickly 
in a geological sense the rocks are likely to break, producing /awHs, 
Good illustrations of faulted mountains are the Sierra Nevada, the 



112 Geography 

Wasatch, and the Block Mountains of Nevada. These are in reality 
great blocks of the earth's crust lifted higher on one edge than 
on the other. 

Sometimes great maspes of lava start toward the surface, but 
do not break through the superimposed crust. Instead, the rocks 
above are arched up and the lava spreads out below. Such moun- 
tains are commonly dome-shaped. They are called jnountaiTis cf 



Fio. 33. — Aatir^aal fold in saodfitones and shalea near base of Upper SilumD. MsiyUnd. 

intrusion and laccoliths. The Henry Mountains of Utah, the Black 
Hills and the Adiiondacks are mountains that were formed in 
this way. 

In some cases plateaus have suffered erosion to such an extent 
that the less resistant rocks have been removed, leaving the more 
resistant masses standing in the form of rangef , ridges and peaks. 
Such mountains are called mountains oj erosion or mountains oj 
circvmdenudati4}n. The Catskill Mountains belong to this class. 

Volcanoes.- — When, as the result of an eruption, lava or fra^mental 
materials, or both, reach the surface, a volcano is formed. The 



Mountains and Their Relations to Life 113 

deposition, about the opening, of some of the ejected materials 
builds up a cone, which in time may become a mountain. Thus, 
a volcanic mountain is the product of volcanic action. Such 
mountains may be veiy lofty, as Aconcagua in Chile, which rises to 
the height of 23,000 feet, or the elevation may be very inconsid- 
erable, as in the case of Vesuvius, the altitude of which is about 
4,000 feet. 

The characteristic form of volcanic mountains is that of a cone. 
Fujiyama in Japan and Mt. Shasta in our own country are striking 
examples. Until the destruction of the volcanic mountain by the 
agents of weathering and erosion has reached an advanced stage, 
the conical form is usually retained. 

Volcanic eruptions have caused a very great loss of life and 
property. In some cases the eruption takes the form of an explosion, 
and in some it is simply a quiet outpouring of lava. Vesuvius is 
an explosive volcano. The volcanoes of the Hawaiian Islands belong 
to the non-explosive class. 

Until comparatively recently the fact that lava (molten rock) 
flows from the earth was taken as proof that the interior of the earth 
is in a molten condition. At the present time the great majority 
of scientists do not believe this to be the case. It is believed that 
the temperature in the earth^s interior is high enough to fuse rock 
if it were at the surface. The great pressure that exists below the 
surface prevents fusion. When, as a result of contraction in the 
rocks, the prepfeure along a particular line has been sufficiently 
relieved, rock fUses; steam and gases are liberated, and an eruption 
takes place, i. 

It is an iuteresiing fact that most volcanoes are upon islands 
and along tlakjB margin of the sea. A volcano that is known to have 
erupted durifxg the historic period is usually classed as active. Some 
300 such are known. One that has not been known to act, but which 
gives evidence*K)f ipossible action, is. classed as dormant. When a 
volcanic mountain has been eroded to its base and practically 
destroyed, it is called an extinct volcano. 

Geysers. — In the regions subject to earthquakes and volcanoes 
there are many openings in the crust of the earth. By means of 
some of these openings water penetrates to considerable depths and 
becomes highly heated. Steam may be generated, and the result- 
ing explosion ejects the water from the fissure, sometimes hurling 
it high in the air. The pressure relieved, water again accumulates 
8 



in the tube, and in due time tlie eruption ia repeated. The interval 
between eruptions from a given tube is fairly constant. 

Owing to the tact that the tubes are long, narrow, and very 



Pia. 34. —Beehive geyser, YellawBtone National Park. 

crooked, convection does not take place readily. The pressure at 
the lower end raises the boiling-point above 212° F. before an explo- 



Mountains and Their Relations to Life 115 

The placing in the tube or in the water of any subatance which 
will check the loss of heat will hasten the geyser action. 

In the geyser areas there are many hot springs. The flow of 
water from these is usually rather constant, and is not in the 
nature of eruptions. A geyser may be defined as a hot spring which 
erupts intermittently. 

There are three well-known geyser regions, Yellowstone National 
Park, Iceland and New Zealand. Each summer thousands of people 
visit Yellowstone National Park to enjoy the unusual spectacle 
presented by the many geysers 

As hot water is an active solvent, much dissolved mineral matter 



Tm. 35.— Mt. Adama, a volcaDio oaiie. Note tbs omdEr coheb is the foreground, 

is ejected. The cooling of the water leads to the deposition of much 
mineralclosetotheopening, thus building upacone, mound orterrace. 
Some of the terraces are dazzllngly white, and are very beautiful. 

" Mountains seem to have been built for the human race as at 
once their schools and cathedrals; full of treasures of illuminated 
manuscript for the scholar, kindly in simple lessons for the worker, 
quiet in pale cloisters for the thinker, glorious in holiness for 
the worshipper. They are great cathedrals of the earth, with 
their gates of rock, pavements of cloud, choirs of stream and stone, 
altars of snow, and vaults of purple traversed by the contiDual 
stars." (Ruskin.) 



116 Geography 

STUDIES 

Why is the population of Belgium more dense than that of Switzerland? 
By means of a map trace the routes of the railroads that cross our western moun- 
tains. Show how topography has influenced the routes. If there were no 
mountains in the British Isles, how would the climate differ from what it is at 
present? Where do mountains stimulate industry? Show some of the influences 
of mountains upon life in Scotland. What are indications of youth in mountains? 
How did mountains influence the World War? 

REFERENCES 

Clbland, Herdman F.: "Geology, Physical and Historical/' chapter xi. 
Langwill, Minnie J.: "Historic Mountain Passes of the World." Jofwt. oj 

Geog.f vol. xii, p. 193. 
MoRLET, Margaret W.: "The Carolina Mountains." 
Salisbury, R. D.: "Physiography: Advanced Course," pp. 33 and 437. 
Semple, Ellen C: "Influences of Geographic Environment," chapters xv and 

xvi. 
Tower, Walter S.: "The Andes as a Factor in South American Geography." 

Jour, of Geog.j vol. xv, p. 1. 
Whitbeck, R. H.: "Mountains." Jovr. oJ Geog.j vol. 9, p. 54. 



CHAPTER X 
Plains and Life 

I 

Plains and Distribution of Population. — Mountains repel settle- 
ment, but plains invite occupancy. As has been stated, about 38 
per cent, of the population of the United States is found above the 
1,000-foot contour. Plains, as a rule, are densely populated unless, 
like those of the Amazon basio, they are forested, or, like our High 
Plains, are deficient in rainfall. The population of India is approxi- 
mately 300,000,000,. about one-third of whom dwell on the deltas 
of the Indus and the Ganges. Upon the lowlands bordering the 
rivers of China there are hundreds of inhabitants to the square mile, 
although some parts of the republic are practically uninhabited. 
Holland, Betg^m, the lowlands of Finance, Germany and the British 
Isles support Jarge populations. People, usually settle upon the 
plains: as lohg^^s space is available; ^^ later they are crowded to the 
higher levels. '^' j ' .. 

Plains and Agricultiire. — -As agriculture is the basal industry, and 
as various industries are closely associated with -it j. the lands that 
are best adapts to farming aue^ieagerly sought and extensively used. 
Except in the tropical zone, the temperatures that exist upon plains 
are more favorable to. agriculture than are those found at higher 
levels. Even in the tropical zone, the lowland temperatures are 
best adapted to certain important plants, such as the banana, bread- 
fruit, pineapple, cocoanut, rubber and others. Owing to less rapid 
radiation, diurnal variations in temperatures are less strongly; marked 
upon the plains than upon the mountains and plateaus. This is 
•an advantage to plant life, but on plains having a hot and humid 
climate it is a detriment to human progress. 

The soil on the plains is deeper than that on the mountains. 
From the steep slopes soil is continually moving under the force 
of gravity and the action of plants, animals and percolating water. 
This slow downward movement is known as creep. Upon very steep 
slopes little or no soil clings. Streams are constantly carrying soil 
from higher to lower levels, and the same is true of glaciers. In all 
of these ways valleys are being steadily filled with rock waste imless 
the work of degradationj or down cutting, exceeds that of aggradation^ 
or the building up of the stream bed. A deep soil is, of course, more 
favorable to agriculture than is a thin one. Moreover, the greater 

117 



118 Geography 

depth enables it to hold a large amount of water which gradually 
reaches the surface under the action of capiliariiy. 

In the soil there are countless openings, so small that they resemble 
hair-like tubes. Water from the soil rises in each of these tubes, 
just as oil rises in a lamp-wick. The water adheres to the sides 
of the tubes, and in this way is gradually lifted to the surface. This 
action, which is called capillarity, is veiy important to the tiller 
of the soil. 

The levehiess of plains is a great aid in agriculture. In hilly 
regions the tillable areas are scattered, and are often very small. 



no. 30.— View ol a piairie ou Die nuWrn Great PUina. (U. S. D. A.) 

' This practically precludes the use of machinery, and hand-tillage 
is resorted to. When there is a lai^e area of level land, gang-plows, 
seeders, mowers, harvesters, etc., can be profitably employed. This 
very greatly increases the acreage that can be handled per man, 
hence reducing the cost of production. 

Plains and the Movements of Petite. — Ea^ and cheapness of 
transport, whether for trade, travel or migration, is very important. 
Upon a prairie-plain there is practically nothing to hinder the move- 
ments of people or of produce. When our early settlers reached 
the prairie-plains they moved westward with great freedom. Russia 
has found it easy to extend eastward a peaceful conquest to the shore 
of the Pacific Ocean, in part because of the levelness of the laud. 



Plains and Life 119 

The building of highways and railways on a plain is easy and 
relatively inexpensive. Little grading is required, and roads follow 
any desired route. This means a multiplicity of roads, and con- 
sequently ample opportunity to market the products of the area. 
The cost of maintaining roads on level land is not so great as it 
is in mountains. 

Another advantage is found in the fact that greater loads, in 
proportion to the power used, can be transported on plains. One 
locomotive on level land will do work for which two are required 
in regions of heavy grades. This means, in rugged regions, increased 
expense for locomotives, for fuel and for employees. 

People who live on plains usually derive more benefit from streams 
as trade routes than do mountain dwellers. Owing to gentle slopes, 
the rivers flow slowly, and as they lay tribute upon a large drainage 
area, they are often navigable. Here, then, is a cheap means of 
transportation. The Mississippi, St. Lawrence, Aniazon, Parana, 
Hoang-ho and Volga are illustrations. 

Owing to ease in communication and to dense px)pulation, the 
inhabitants of plains are constantly in touch with one another and 
with the outside world. This. gives them the benefit of the newest 
in all lines. As a result there is a tendency to broaden the horizon, 
and to substitute liberal-mindedness and progress for narrowness 
and prejudice. 

The uniformity in climatic conditions leads to uniformity in plant 
and animal life, and hence, to a certain extent, in interests and indus- 
tries. As a rule, a large area of a plain recognizes the same gover- 
mental authority. The climatic uniformity which plains present 
have in some cases a disadvantageous effect. This is seen in Siberia, 
where there is very little progress. Here the winters are so long 
and so severe that the enforced life within doors unfits the peasant 
for work when Spring arrives. Owing to the marshy condition of 
large areas, roads are practically impassable during the summer, and 
cultivation is retarded until late in the season. 

Origin of Plains. — When deep borings for water or for any other, 
purpose are made in our Central Plain, rock is encountered. The 
rock may be struck at a depth of a few feet or a few hundred feet. 
In Illinois, Indiana and Iowa limestone rock underlies the surface. 
In South Dakota it is sandstone. As these are sedimentary rocks 
we have proof that the Central Plain was formed by a change in 
the position of land and sea areas. Fundamentally , plains are formed 
by elevations of former sea floors or by the draining away of fhe water, 



120 Geography 

The rocks which underlie the surface of plains are more commonly 
in a horizontal position than are the rocks of plateaus and mountains. 
This shows that plains have suffered less earth movement than have 
the higher parts of the earth. 

A plain, varying in width from a few miles to 300 miles, extends 
along the entire eastern coast of the United States. This plain, 
called the Atlantic Coastal Plain j was formed primarily by an uplift 
of part of the sea floor. This is shown by the fact that the rocks 
are aqueous; that is, rocks formed through the consolidation of 
sediments deposited in water. Similar plains are found along the 
borders of all of the continents, although in Africa and along the 
western coast of South America they are very narrow. 

The disappearance of all or a considerable part of a large lake 
leaves exposed flat areas, formerly the lake floors. Such areas are 
known as lake plains, A shrinkage io our Great Lakes has given 
rise to the lake plains that border them. The remarkably level 
wheat lands near Lake Winnipeg owe their origin to the disappearance 
of former Lake Agassiz, of which Lake Winnipeg is a remnant. As 
the waters of prehistoric Lake Bonneville gradually disappeared, 
owing to increased aridity in that part of our country, the plains 
surrounding Great Salt Lake were formed. 

Every stream carries to the sea quantities of rock waste. The 
amount carried depends upon the slope, the protection afforded by 
vegetation, the resistance of the rock or soil, the volume of the water, 
and the pebbles and sand (tools) carried by the stream. The amount 
of rock waste carried to the Gulf by the Mississippi River has been 
estimated to be more than 1,000,000 tons daily. 

In the lower courses of the streams, especially during times of 
flood, the rock waste is deposited on each side of the channels. Year 
by year and century by century the area so built up is extended. 
The resulting plain is called an alluvial or a stream plain. The part 
of the plain that the stream wanders over during times of flood 
is called a flood plain. A flood plain is, then, part of a stream plain. 

In some parts of the world, as in the central part of the United 
States and in central Canada, glaciers have left great accumulations 
of boulders, gravel, sand and mud, thus aiding greatly in the work 
of building up the plains. 

With respect to altitude, no sharp line can be drawn between 
plains and plateaus. In fact some authorities call the great area 
west of the one hundredth meridian and east of the Rocky Mountains 
a plateau, while by others the term High Plams is applied. The 



Plains and Life 121 

area is higher than many that are recognized by all as being plateaus, 
yet it has the level surface characteristic of plains, and is much 
lower than the mountains that rise on the west. 

This area, like similar ones in Asia, is not densely populated, 
because of deficiency of rainfall. Upon our High Plains the annual 
precipitation is for the moat part under twenty inches. The work 
of our government in providing water for parts of this area^ and the 
work of the Bureau of Plant Industry in bringing from the Old World 
plants adapted to the conditions that exist upon the High Plains 
is doing much to develop the region. In all such cases the pasturing 
of flocks and herds is the dominant industry. 

STUDIES 

On a map of the world or on a globe locate all of the extensive plains. Are 
there any of these plains that are not well-populated? Why? Which of our 
states are wholly plains? Compare the percentage of Iowa and West Virginia 
devoted to agriculture. Account for the difference. How was the plain of 
which Belgium is a part related to the World War? 

REFERENCES 

Herbbrtson, a. J. and F. D.: ''Man and His Work/' chapters i, iii, iv, v. 

Salisbury, R. D.: "Physiography: Advanced Course," p. 16. 

Sbmple, Ellen C: "Influences of Geographic Environment," chapter xvi. 



CHAPTER XI 

Rivers and Man 

From almost any point on the rim of the Grand Canyon of the 
Colorado River a most wonderful view is presented. The observer 
is standing upon one edge of what appears to be a stupendous crack 
in the crust of the earth. Ten miles away is the opposite rim of 
this inmiense gash. The slope from the farther rim to the bottom 
of the canyon is seen to be made up of a series of very steep cliffs, 
some of them hundreds of feet in height, alternating with more 
gentle declivities. * The slope on the observer's side is the same, but 
less of it comes within his field of vision. As far as the eye can 
reach there is a tangle of turrets, domes, spires and peaks. A mile 
below is the bottom of the canyon, and upon it can be seen short 
stretches of the river. It is a raging torrent, yet no sound comes 
to the observer far above. The most wonderful section of the Colo- 
rado Canyon is some 300 miles in length. Its walls from top to bot- 
tom are of solid rock. An army, equipped with the best of tools, 
would work for centuries in excavating such a canyon. How could 
Nature have performed the work? 

Destructive Work of Streams. — As has been pointed out, water 
flowing from higher to lower levels develops energy. The amount 
of this energy depends upon the distance which the water falls, and 
the volume of the water. The amount of erosion performed by a 
stream depends upon these conditions, and in addition the tools 
carried (the load of rock waste), the resistance of the rock or soil, 
and the extent of a forest or grass cover. 

The water flowing in the Colorado River falls thousands of feet 
before reaching the Gulf of Lower California. Its power to erode 
is therefore very great. As the Colorado flows swiftly, it is not 
easily thrown from side to side by obstacles. It therefore deepens 
its valley more rapidly than it widens it. Erosion on the bed of 
a channel is often called corrosion. A stream that is constantly 
surging from side to side undercuts its banks, and great masses of 
earth and rock fall. Such a stream widens its valley faster than 
it deepens it. 

In an arid region a river has few tributaries, hence there are few 
tributary or entrant valleys. Aridity is therefore another cause for 
slowness in valley widening. The Colorado Canyon ba9 been cut 
122 



Rivers and Man 



123 



in a lofty plateau, the rock layers in which are practically horizontal. 
As the river is working upon one stratum of rock at a time, it ip 
eroding material fairly uniform in resistance. There is therefore less 
undermining of the sides of the valley thai would be the case were 
the strata tilted. 

As a result of the swiftness of the current, aridity of the climate, 
and horizontal position of the rocks, the Colorado has developed a 
valley the depth of which is great in proportion to its width. Such a 
valley is called a gorge if small; a canyon if large. 

Century by century, as the Colorado continues its work, its 
valley will be cut deeper into the rock. As no stream can cut any 
part of its valley much below the level of the body of water into 




Fig. 37. — Up-stream development of a gully. 

which it flows (th^j^ level is known as base level), it is evident that 
the limit pf deepiiihing will eventually be reached. Base level is 
reached at the inouth of a stream before it is reached at points 
nearer the source. Hence a valley develops from the mouth of its 
stream upward on to the land. i 

Although ,$id^-cutting is not being carried oni extensively in the 
Colorado, valley widening is always in progress. In the future the 
canyon will become shallower in proportion to its width. In othjEjj' 
words, the distinctively canyon form will slowly give place to the 
ordinary valley form. 

Little by little, then, through a period of great but unknown 
duration, the Colorado River has cut its way downward into solid 
rock. Boulders have been, by their ceaseless grinding upon one 
another and upon the bed of the stream, reduced to pebbles, sand 



RiVERB AND Man 125 

pose, you may perhaps more fully realize the significance of the 
foUowing statement: "It may therefore be said thatever^ drop of 
water which falls upon the land has for its mission the getting of 
the land into the sea."' According to reliable estimates, streams are 
lowering the surface of the earth at the rate of one foot in 3,500 years. 
When a stream has performed 
a large part of its original work, 
that is, has lowered most of the 
land in it'^ basin to base level, 
it is said to be old. A stream that 
has performed oniy a small part 
of its original task is called a 
youTig or ^ youthful stre&m. These 
terms have no reference to years. 
As most of the land in the basin 
of the Colorado River is thou- 
sands of feet above the level of 
the sea, and as the river has a 
canyon valley, a steep gradient, 
and many falls and rapids, it is a 
good example of a young stream, 
although it has been in existence 
for thousands of years. 

If all of the lands in a drainage 
basin were to be reduced to base 
level, the area would have com- 
pleted a cycle of erosion. As the 
time required for this is so enor- 
mous, all orpart of any large basin 
PhowbrciamtoWr j likely to experience some upliffr- 

Fio. 39.— Varnal FaHs, Ynreniite Vatley. . , ^ .."^ , . ,' , 

mg before the cycle is completed. 
It is evident that such uplift would give the streams renewed energy, 
because their fail would be increased. With this renewed energy 
the rivers would again produce such topographic forms as are charac- 
teristic of the work of young streams. A river that has been given 
new life by this process of uplifting is called a rejiwenated stream. 
Some stream valleys show by their forms a record of such upliftmg. 
If, then, you can realize that the great Canyon of the Colorado 
has been excavated from solid rock by the action of running water 

iSaliabury, R. D.: "PhyBiography: Advanced Course," p. 122. 



126 Geography 

aided by the tools which it carries, you will find it less difficult to 
appreciate the fact that all stream valleys, big or little, have been 
developed in the same way. Remember, then, that stream valleys are 
made hy the work of streams. It is necessary to make a distinction 
here, for great basins, such as the one bounded by the Rocky Moun- 
tains on the west and the Appalachian system on the east, are 
called valleys. They are not stream valleys, however, their origin 
being due to movements of the earth crust. 

No amount of book study will take the place of actual observation. 
Upon every slope and in every roadside ditch the opportunities 
to study valley development during and following rainstorms are 
numberless. Hence, on a small scale, can be found valleys in all 
stages of their history, and all the topographic forms that streams 
produce. It is impossible to study geography in a really vital way 
unless observation of nature accompanies the use of books. 

Falls. — Between Lake Erie and Lake Ontario is situated one 
of the most marvelous sights on the face of the earth. A gr^t wall 
of water, divided into two parts by an island, drops over a clifiF 
more than 150 feet high. The roar of the falling water can be heard 
for a long distance when the wind is favorable, and a great cloud 
of spray and mist rises from the rocks upon which the water is dashed. 
This is the world-famed Niagara Falls. 

Study has shown that at this point a bluff, known as the Niagara 
Escarpment, and composed of resistant limestone, passes from New 
York State into Canada. The steep face of the bluff is to the north. 
Centuries ago, when the outlet of Lake Erie was blocked by an 
ice sheet, the waters of the lake found a new outlet over the NisCgara 
Escarpment. Thus was developed the Niagara Falls. 

Inch by inch the edge of the cliff over which the water falls has 
been cut back, and consequently the Niagara Falls, like all other 
falls, works up stream. This up-stream march of falls is called the 
recession of falls. The Niagara Gorge, about seven miles long, con- 
stitutes a record of the recession of the falls, for the gorge is the result 
of the movement. Since 1678 the falls have receded at the average 
rate of from four to five feet per year. Could we be sure that the 
rate of recession has been the same since the falls originated, what 
a wonderful geological timepiece the gorge would be! 

In New England, and in other glaciated areas, many falls have 
resulted because of the blocking of streams by the glacial deposits. 
Inequalities in the hardness of rock in stream beds leads to unequal 
erosion, and therefore to the origin of falls. Lava-flows, landslides 



Rivers and Man 127 

and movements of the earth's crust are responsible for the origin 
of some falls. 

The energy expended by the Niagara River as it makes its great 
leap is equal to about 5,000,000 horse-power. Few, if any, geologists 
believe that the gorge was formed in less than 10,000 years. Compare 
the work done here with that which has been done by the Colorado 
River. Some of the energy of this great fall is used in the form of 
power and light in the cities of Niagara Falls, Buffalo, Tonawanda, 
Hamilton, and many other places. Falls in practically all parts of 
the world are being used for similar purposes. Falls have another 
important economic bearing, because they obstruct navigation. This 
will be discussed in another place. 

Transportive Work of Streams. — ^As has been stated, streams 
transport the loads which they acquire through their own efforts, 
as well as the rock waste brought to them by tributaries, glaciers, 
landslides and winds. The coarser material is rolled along their 
beds and the fine particles carried in suspension. In addition, a 
large amount is held in solution. Gravity aids streams in transport- 
ing their loads. It should be remembered also that the weight of 
a; stone immersed in water is decreased by an amount equal to the 
weight of an equal volume of water. Upward currents, caused by 
the inequalities of the beds of streams, keep small particles suspended 
in the water while they are carried forward considerable distances. 

Constructive Work of Streams. — When the energy of a stream is 
not sufficient to transport all of its load, a part of it is deposited. The 
causes of deposition are decrease in velopity or decrease in volume, 
or both. Checks in velocity occur all along the course of a stream, 
and, as a consequence, deposition occurs at practically all points. 
As the transportive power of a stream decreases very rapidly with 
decrease in the velocity, we find the larger materials deposited where 
the slope is steep, and the finer, materials where the gradient is very 
gentle. When a stream flows into the sea or any large body of water, 
its velocity is at once checked, and deposition results. 

As the flood stage in a stream passes, there is a decrease in both 
volume and velocity of water, and consequently sediment is deposited. 
In its lower course, a stream flowing over very low land may flow 
through several channels to the sea. As the streams in these channels 
distribute the waters of the trunk stream they are called distrib'w- 
taries. Along each of these deposition occurs, and the resulting 
plain is called a delta. 

In addition to stream plains (p. 120) and deltas, river deposits 



128 



Geography 



form bars, islands, capes, hooks, spits, alluvial fans and alluvial 
cones. It has been estimated that the Mississippi carries annually 
to the Gulf sufficient material to build up one square mile to the 
height of 268 feet. "It would take nearly 900 trains of 50 cars 
each, each car carrying 25 tons, to carry an equal amount of sand 
and mud to the Gulf."^ 

Centuries ago the city of Adria was a seaport. Today the delta 
built by the Po River extends 14 miles beyond the site of the ancient 
city that gave the Adriatic Sea its name. The Hoang-ho, Ganges, 
Orinoco and Rh6ne are other streams which are building deltas. 

Distribution of Streams. — As streams owe their origin to the rain 
that falls upon the earth, we find them everywhere. In regions 
of abundant precipitation they are numerous, unless much of the 




FiQ. 40. — Relation of stream permanency to water level: A-B, water table in 
dry seasons; X-Y, water table in wet seasons. 

area is in the form of marshes, but in arid regions they are scarce. 

In regions of very little precipitation stream channels carry water 
during and for a short time after rains, but at other times they are 
dry. Such streams are called intermiMent streams. There are also 
countless intermittent streams in every humid region. A stream 
will be intermittent until it has sunk its valley to the level at which 
water stands in the soil or rock. This level, which is known as the 
ground water level or water table^ is at different heights in different 
places, and its height at a given place varies from time to time. 
After a stream has reached this level it does not depend direcUy 
upon precipitation, and is therefore a permanent stream. 

Rain that falls upon 32 states finds its way to the Mississippi and 
to the Gulf. The entire drainage of eight states is poured into the 

^Salisbury, R. D.: ''Physiography: Advanced Ck)urse," p. 121. 



Rivers and Man 129 

Mississippi. The Mississippi is the mairiy trunk, or master stream, 
and those contributing water to it are the tributaries. The entire 
network of streams is a river system, and the total area drained is the 
drainage basin. 

Rivers as Carriers. — '* Every country of large extent finds, next 
to the fertility of its soil, its navigable rivers the most important 
factors of its early development. The one is fundamental to the pro- 
duction of wealth, and the other to its distribution and exchange."^ 

Waterways are of great value because of the low cost of transpor- 
tation. In some cases these natural highways have been completely 
constructed by nature, and in all cases the work has been partially 
so done. The expense of keeping the waterways in repair is usually 
slight. The floating stock does not deteriorate rapidly as a result 
of use, and the cost of motive power is reduced to the minimum. 
In fact, in many cases the chief item of expense is that incidental 
to the loading and unloading of the goods. 

As a country develops, railroads take the chief place as carriers 
both of freight and passengers. The inland waterways are able to 
compete successfully only in the transportation of heavy, bulky and 
non-perishable goods. Hence we find in many regions well equipped 
with railroads that the rivers, lakes and canals transport such com- 
modities as iron-ore, stone, coal, lumber, grain. 

Our country is particularly favored in the nature and extent 
of its inland waterways. The Mississippi and its tributaries offer 
some 9,000 miles of navigable waters — a distance more than equal 
to the diameter of the earth. The value of these rivers becomes 
the more apparent when we remember that they traverse a part 
of the United States the value of the natural resources of which 
is beyond computation. The navigable part of the Mississippi alone 
gives river frontage to ten states. 

By means of the St. Lawrence and the Great Lakes a waterway 
is opened to the very heart of our country and Canada. This magni- 
ficent liighway is of inestimable value, for it draws upon the forest 
wealth of northern Michigan, Wisconsin and Minnesota, the great 
iron and copper deposits along the shores of Lake Superior, and the 
vast wheatfields of Minnesota and the Dakotas. Although the Great 
Lakes are closed to navigation for about four months each year, 
a much greater tonnage passes through the St. Mary's canal, which 



^ Semple, Ellen C. : "American History and Its Geographic Conditions," 
p. 251. 
9 



130 Geography 

connects Lake Superior and Lake Huron, than through the Suez 
Canal, although the latter is open the entire year, and is used by 
the ships of many nations. 

The chief articles of freight shipped by the Great Lakes and the 
St. Lawrence are, in the order of their importance, iron-ore, coal, 
grain, lumber and flour. Practically all of the iron-ore shipped by 
water in the United States is carried on the Great Lakes. It is 
shipped from Duluth, Two Harbors, Superior, Ashland, Ironwood, 
Marquette and Escanaba to Chicago, Gary, Detroit, Cleveland, 
Ashtabula, Erie and Buffalo. 

While the movement of iron-ore is eastward, the coal is carried 
westward. This comes from the Pennsylvania and Ohio coal fields. 
Erie, Pennsylvania, and Cleveland, Ohio, are important shipping 
points, and the coal is unloaded at various points on Lakes Michigan 
and Superior. Like the iron-ore, the grain and flour move eastward. 
The chief shipping points are Duluth, Superior, Chicago and Mil- 
waukee. Much of the grain is exported, reaching the Atlantic coast 
by way of the Erie Canal. Although the amount of lumber shipped 
on the Great Lakes is large, it is steadily decreasing, because our 
forest resource in the lake region is becoming depleted. Chicago 
is our greatest lumber market, serving as a point of distribution 
for a large and populous area. 

The value of a river as a means of transporting goods and people 
depends in a large measure upon its depth. For a considerable dis- 
tance from the sea the St. Lawrence is an estuary. In places the 
river reaches the depth of 800 feet. At the mouth of the Saguenay it 
is nearly 200 feet deep. The head of navigation is found at Montreal, 
600 miles inland, where the depth is 30 feet. Between Montreal 
and Lake Ontario there are various rapids around which canals have 
been constructed. 

Centuries ago the seaward portion of the St. Lawrence valley 
subsided below the level of the sea. The waters of the sea then 
penetrated the valley, filling it with water to a great depth. This 
part of the St. Lawrence valley is therefore called by geographers 
a drowned valley. This is a striking illustration of how the forces 
of nature influence the life of man. 

The Hudson valley, as far as Albany, is a drowned valley. Although 
small, the Hudson is of tremendous economic value. Its great depth 
(due to drowning), and the comparative ease with which it was 
connected by means of the Erie Canal to the Great Lakes, has made 
it one of our most important lines of trade. 



Rivers and Man 131 

The Amazon, the largest river in the worid, is a great water- 
highway, although owing to the undeveloped condition of the country- 
it does not bear as great a commerce as does the much smaller Rhine. 
"The main stream of the Amazon is about 4,000 miles, or 600 miles 
longer than the distance from Liverpool to New York. It has 29 
large tributaries, each a great river in itself. It offers a means of 
inland navigation for more than 20,000 miles. The source of the 
river is only 60 miles from Lima, near the Pacific coast. It thus 
is seen practically to cross the continent of South America from 
west to east, and that at a place where the continent is almost at 
its widest. It leads through a vast region, supplying rubber, chocolate, 
hides and tropical woods, which would be of little use to man were 
it not for this great pathway, for the tropical forest is all but impene- 
trable away from the river courses that offer natural highways."* 

It is difficult to realize how fiat is the region drained by this 
great river. From a point 500 miles from the sea the Amazon falls 
on the average but one-eighth of an inch to the mile. At the distance 
of 2,000 miles from the sea the altitude of the river is but 35 feet. 
This low gradient is a great advantage to navigation. Unlike the 
St. Lawrence, which is closed by ice from December first to May 
first, the Amazon is njever so obstructed. 

The Parana offers thousands of miles of water communication. 
Ships drawing 21 feet can ascend to Rosario, 230 miles from Buenos 
Aires. Those of 19 feet draught reach Santa F6, a distance of 350 
miles. Vessels drawing 15 feet can ascend 850 miles, and those requir- 
ing but 8 feet can penetrate the country to a distance of 2,000 miles 
from Buenos Aires. 

The Rhine, although a relatively small stream, is one of the 
most important river routes in the world. During the last quarter 
of a century millions of dollars have been expended in improving 
this river. It has been deepened and made nearly uniform in 
width. Tugs towing from one to six barges loaded with coal or 
lumber may very frequently be seen. Much stone is shipped down 
stream to Holland, which has little of this commodity. Canals 
connect the Rhine with the Rh6ne and the Seine. 

Russia has many large rivers, yet their value as lines of transpor- 
tation is lessened by several circumstances. The Volga, a mighty 
stream, bears considerable commerce, yet it terminates i^ an inland 
sea. As a result, most of its freight is borne up stream, thus increasing 

* Bowman, Isaiah: Journal of Geography, vol. ix, p. 36. 



132 Geography 

the cost of transportation. For a part of the year it is ice-bound. 
The Ob, the Yenesei and the Lena, all rivers of great magnitude, 
empty into the Arctic, and hence are of little commercial value. 

The development of Africa has been greatly retarded by the fact 
that her rivers break through a mountain wall before reaching the 
sea. There is no natural highway leading into the continent. The 
valley of the historic Nile is the chief route, and navigation on this 
river is much impeded by rapids. 

Rivers and the Location of Cities. — Since the courses of trade and 
travel are so greatly influenced by rivers, it is but natural that the 
distribution of population and the location and development of cities 
should be affected by them. 

Important cities are practically sure to grow at or near the mouths 
of navigable rivers. New York, Philadelphia, New Orleans and 
Buenos Aires are examples. Montreal, Paris and Hankow are cities 
that owe their prominence in part to their location at the head of 
deep-water navigation. St. Louis, Frankfort-on-Main, Lyons, Manaos 
and Pittsburgh are advantageously situated at the junction of rivers. 
Minneapolis, Holyoke, Spokane and Buffalo derive water-power for 
their industries from falls upon which or near which they are situated. 

Floods in Rivers. — Rivers which are subject.to serious floods often 
do great damage to cities along their banks, and to large areas in 
their basins. The Hoang-ho of China has caused most disastrous 
floods. The Ganges, the Po, the Seine, the Mississippi, and many 
other rivers are subject to flood. In the spring of 1912, and again 
in 1913, most disastrous floods occurred in the Mississippi and its 
tributaries. The loss in 1912 is estimated at $78,187,670, and that 
in 1913 at $163,564,793. The flood of 1913 was caused by a four- 
days^ rain which broke all previous records in the Mississippi basin. 
In both cases flood warnings, which resulted in the saving of life and 
property, were sent out. "During the flood of 1912, according to 
such estimates as were obtainable, property to the value of $16,180,- 
000 was saved, of which about $10,000,000 was in the district below 
Vicksburg, Mississippi. The total annual cost of the river and flood 
service for the entire country, in oluding telegraph and telephone tolls, 
is about $80,000, or only about one-half of 1 per cent, of the value 
of the property saved in this one flood. ''^ 

^ Frankenfield, H. C. : "The Ohio and Mississippi Floods of 1912." Bulletin 
F, Weather Bureau, p. 24. 



Rivers and Man 133 

In order to hold back flood waters people have built walls, or 
levees, along the banks of streams subject to flood. These cause 
the streams' to deposit material on their beds, since they cannot 
overflow their banks and deposit on a larger area. In time the bed 
of the stream becomes higher than the land adjacent to the stream, 
but outside of the levees. When, therefore, a levee breaks, the flood 
is likely to be very destructive. 



Levee construction along the lower Mississippi was first under- 
taken by the planters. Later the state governments aided, and now 
the national government carries on the work. The levees must be 
patrolled and the utmost vigilance employed to keep them in repair. 
In 1876 James B. Eads established the jetties near one of the mouths 
of the river. These narrowed the channel, and as a result the velocity 
of the current was increased, and the stream carried away sedunent 
instead of depositing as formerly. 



134 Geography 

Rivers and Water Supply. — .Some streams are of great value in 
furnishing a wat«r supply both for irrigation and for use in cities. 
fVacticaliy all streams in arid regions are important iii the first of 
these ways. The Nile is an excellent example. Without its 
life-giving waters Egypt would be a desert, as is the region just 
beyond the irrigated land. The Indus is used extensively for 
irrigation purposes. 

Los Angeles, California, at a cost of about $27,000,000, has brought 



Fig, 42— RaUroad following river vslley. 

water from Owens River, 223 miles distant. San Francisco has under 
way a project to scpure a water supply from the Hetch-Hetchy 
valley in the Sierra Nevada, Formerly Cairo, Egypt, took its water 
supply directly from the Nile, but it is now pumped from the sands 
below the stream- New York City at tremendous cost has brought 
water from the Catskill Mountains. 

Rivers and Railroad Construction.^ — Since transportation by 
water is so cheap, a region having many waterways may be slow 
to build highways and railroads. This was true of the eastern and 



Rivers and Man . 135 

« 

central parts of our country. Holland with her navigable rivers 
arid canals has a relatively slight mileage of railroad. In our western 
country the absence of waterways made roads a necessity, and they 
were rapidly constructed. South Africa and Australia illustrate the 
same point. 

Rivers and History. — From the earliest times rivers have guided 
the movements of people, and have been closely associated with his- 
tory. The valley of the Rhone is a natural route of travel leading 
from the Mediterranean into Europe. Along it there have been 
peaceful and warlike movements for centuries. The Rhine is even 
more historic. Its course is shared by Switzerland, Germany and 
the Netherlands. For hundreds of years the valley of the Danube 
has echoed to the tramping of migrating peoples. The Orient Railway 
follows the valley for some distance, and the lower course of the river 
was au important factor in the Rumanian campaign during the 
World War. 

Streams guided the movements of our early settlers, both in the 
East and as they toiled up the slope toward the Rocky Mountains. 
The trappers and fur traders followed up every mountain stream in 
their quest for pelts. The same has been true in Siberia. The valleys 
of the Hudson, the Mohawk and the Shenandoah were important 
in the Indian and later wars, and the Mississippi played an important 
part in our Civil War. 

The St. Lawrence has left its impress upon the history of Canada, 
and to some extent upon that of the Unites States. Its valley guided 
the movements of the early French missionary, trapper and trader, 
while the settler built his cabin upon its banks. The importance 
of water frontage led to the establishment of long, narrow holdings 
and a concentration of population along the river. Speaking of these 
early conditions Parkman says: '^One could have seen nearly every 
house in Canada by paddling a canoe up the St. Lawrence and 
the Richelieu.''® 

STUDIES 

Compare the work performed by the Colorado and the Platte, and 
account for the difference. In what states in our country can little water 
power be developed? Have all of these states coal deposits? On a base 
map of the United States indicate the limit of navigation on each of 
the important rivers. Make a thorough study of the most important stream 
in your state. 

•^ Parkman: "The Old Regime in Canada," p. 297, 



136 Geography 



REFERENCES 



Blackwelder, Eliot: "The Yang-Tze-Kiang." Jour, of Geog., vol ix, p. 101. 
Bowman, Isaiah: "The Amazon." Jour. ofGeog.j vol. ix, p. 36. 
Brown, Robert: "The Mississippi." Jour, of Geog,j vol. ix, p. 71. 
Cleland, Herdman F.: "Geology, Physical and Historicsal," chapter iv. 
Finch, V. C: "The St. Lawrence." Jour, of Geog.j vol. x, p. 119. 
HoMBURG, Frederick: "The Danube." Jour, of Geog.j vol. x, p. 199. 
HoMBURO, Frederick: "The Volga." Jour, of Geog.j vol. ix, p. 125. 
Russell, I. C: "Rivers of North America." 

Semple, Ellen C: "Influences of Geographic Environment," chapter ix. 
Whitbeck, R. H.: "The St. Lawrence River and Its Part in the Making of 
Canada." Bull. Am. Geog. Soc.^ 47, 384. 



CHAPTER XII 

Lakes: Their Origin and Uses 

Distribution. — A map of the United States shows that in some 
parts of our country lakes are very numerous, while in other sections 
there are very few. Illinois, for example, has, except in the extreme 
northern part, few lakes, although Wisconsin has thousands. One 
may travel for scores of miles in the central valley of California 
and not see a lake, yet the topographic sheet representing the Mt. 
Lyell Quadrangle (926 square miles in area) shows 40 lakes which 
are named, and at least twice as many not named. Scotland, Finland 
and Switzerland are noted for their lakes, but France, Germany and 
Spain are not. The explanation of the distribution of lakes is to 
be found in their origin. 

Origin of Lake Basins. — When the great ice sheet covered Canada 
and much of the northern part of our country, it deposited quantities 
of boulders, gravel, sand and clay (glacial drift). In countless cases 
the drift filled or partially filled stream valleys, thus creating ponds 
or lakes on the up-stream sides of the obstacles. 

The glacier exerted a tremendous ' pressure as it slowly crept 
forward, scooping basins out of the earth, or even solid rock, but 
more frequently enlarging existing basins. Upon the retreat of the 
glacier, the basins filled with water. 

The foregoing suggests that lakes should be more numerous in 
glaciated than in non-glaciated regions. Fig. 46 shows that this is 
the case. Many lakes in New England, New York State, the 
north-central part of our country and Canada are of glacial origin. 
The same is true of most of the lakes of western Canada, California 
and Europe. 

As we have seen, the crustal movements of the earth, diastro^ 
phisniy produce unequal results at different points. An upward 
movement across the course of a stream might dam the waters, thus 
giving rise to a lake. A downward movement might form a basin. 
Faulting gave rise to the basin in which beautiful Lake Tahoe, 
California-Nevada, is situated. The lake is 21.6 by 12 miles in its di- 
mensions. The surface of the lake is 6,225 feet above sea level, and 
the greatest depth is 1,645 feet. Surrounding the basin are peaks 
ranging in altitude from 8,000 to 10,000 feet. The water is so clear 
that the bottom can be seen at depths of more than 100 feet. 

137 



138 Gkoqraphy 

In the southern part of Or^on there is one of the most beautiful 
lakes in the world — Crater Lake. It occupies a practically circular 
basin near the top of Mount Mazama. The diamefer of the basio 
is about five miles, and the greatest depth of the lake is nearly 
2,000 feet. The walls of the basin rise very steeply from 700 to 
nearly 2,000 feet above the water. 

The conical form of Mount Mazama suggests that it is of volcanic 
origin. Study shows that this is true. At some time durine the 



Fia. 43.— Cmler Lake. Oreeon. 

volcano's history several thousand feet of the mountain sank, 
forming a great basin, or a caldera. Later action developed a cone, 
which now forms Wizard Island, Distinct lava flows are found 
upon the slopes of this island, and above are steeper slopes formed 
more largely of loose material. The crater, which is quite acces- 
sible, is about 150 feet in depth. 

Although the lake has no surface outlet, its waters are fresh and 
have been stocked with fish. The porosity of the walls of the lake 
may permit of the escape of water, but in any event as no stream 
flows into the basin, and as the rate of evaporation is slow and preci- 
pitation abundant, the waters would remain fresh a very long time, 
if not always. 



. Lakes: Their Origin and Uses 139 

Sometimes a tributary stream, having a much steeper slope than 
the main stream, brings to the latter more material than it can remove. 
This acts as a dam on the main stream and causes its waters to spread 
out. Such a widened form of a river is often called a lake. Peoria 
Lake in the Illinois River, Pepin Lake in the Mississippi River, 
and Lake St. Peter in the St. Lawrence, are illustrations. 

Salt Lakes.— Analysis of the waters of rivers shows that in all 
cases they carry some salt, so Uttle, however, that it can seldom be 
detected by the taste. Unless a lake has an outlet, all of the salt 



Fio. 44.-Vegecatiini filiiriK Upper Klamath Luke. 

carried to it by streams remains, for solids are not removed from the 
water through the process of evaporation. Hence, in time, the 
waters of such lake would become salty. 

Owing to diastrophic movements the outlet of a lake might be 
cut off, and such a lake would eventually become a salt-water lake. 
Great Salt Lake is the most striking example of a salt lake in our 
country. Ages ago it was a salt-water lake. Then came a period 
of increased precipitation, and the level of the lake rose until an outlet 
to the Snake River was established. In time, therefore, the lake 
became fresh. Later through decrease in precipitation the level fell 
below the outlet, and once more the water of the lake beeame salty. 
In the waters of the ocean there is about 3 per cent, of salt. 
In Great Salt Lake the percentage varies from 12 to more than 20. 



140 Geography 

So dense is the water tbat a person cannot sink in it. The Caspian, 
the Aral and the Dead Seas are other examples of salt-water lakes, 
although they are called seas. 

Changes in Lake Basins.^ — You probably think of lakes as being 
permanent features of the earth's surface, yet this is far from being 
the case. The sediment deposited in lakes by streams slowly 
raises the level of the lake floors (unless a crustal subsidence is taking 
place), and as a result the ba^tis are in time filled. 



e, Britieh Columbia. A Btiicul lalie. 

As the filling process nears completion, the lake is gradually 
transformed into a bog or marsh. The growth of vegetation along 
the shore aids in the filling process. In this way many lakes are 
being gradually transformed into marshes. Around the shores of 
the Klamath Lakes in Oregon there are thousands of acres of swamp 
lands that are gradually encroaching upon the lakes. 

If a stream flows out of a lake it lowers its outlet through the 
process of erosion. This work is carried on very slowly, because 
■ most of the sediment carried into lakes remains there, and conse- 
quently outflowing streams have few tools with which to work. 
The Rhfine flows into Lake Geneva, carrying much sediment. When 
it issues from the lake it carries very little. The Niagara River carries 



Lakes: Their Origin and Uses 141 

so little sediment that it is unable to tear the tiny plants from the 
rocks on its bed. Through the double process of basin filling and 
outlet lowering all existing lakes will in time be destroyed. 

Relation of Lakes to Man. — During the summer millions of people 
in our country and in Europe leave the cities to spend a few days 
or a few weeks in some resort. A very large number of resorts are 
located upon the shores of lakes. Boating, bathing, fishing and at^ 
tractive scenery are among the allurements. This extensive use of 
lakes concerns transportation companies, hotel- and shopkeepers, 
farmers and dairymen who furnish supplies, and many others in 
addition to the tourists. Lake resorts are found in various parts of 
our country, and some of the most beautiful and far-famed cities of 
Europe are located upon lake shores. Geneva, Lucerne, Montreux 
and Interlaken in Switzerland, and Bellagio, Lugano and Menaggio 
in Italy may be mentioned. 

In a few cases lakes are very important commercial routes. Our 
Great Lakes are the most striking examples. The Caspian Sea 
(which is in reality a lake). Lake Geneva, Lake Constance and Lake 
Titicaca have some commercial value. The importance of frontage 
upon a large lake is illustrated by the fact that Congress so fixed 
the boimdaries of Illinois and Indiana th^ each state should have 
some frontage on Lake Michigan. 

In the southern peninsula of Michigan large quantities of peaches 
are grown. Many are shipped by rail and boat to Chicago; for 
northern Illinois, although in the same latitude as the peach-growing 
area in Michigan, does not produce this fruit. During the summer 
large numbers of people go from Chicago to resorts on the Michigan 
side of the lake. Both of these conditions are due to the influence 
of Lake Michigan upon the climate. 

Water, being a poor conductor, heats and cools slowly. Lake 
Michigan never freezes over, because the entire volume of water (the 
maximum depth of the lake is approximately 1 ,000 feet) would have to 
be reduced to a temperature of 39*^ F. before any of it could freeze. 
This would take so long that freezing occurs close to the shore only. 

During the winter, then, the eastern shore of Lake Michigan is 
benefited by the relatively moderate temperatures of the waters 
of the lake. This prevents trees from winter-killing. As spring 
advances and the land warms, high temperatures on the Michigan 
side are prevented by the cool winds from the lake. This prevents 
the fruit trees from blossoming as early as they do on the west side 
and they are therefore less liable to be injured by spring frosts. The 
land winds that blow over Chicago bring high temperatures in summer 



1 



142 Geography 

and low temperatures in winter. As a result the eastern shore is 
the better adapted to resorts. 

Many lakes are of value because they furnish an abundant 
supply of water to cities on their shores. The problem of securing 
an adequate supply of pure water for drinking, as well as a supply 
for fire protection, street sprinkling and industrial uses, is one of 
the greatest that cities have to solve. Duluth, Milwaukee, Chicago, 
Detroit, Cleveland and Buffalo are examples of cities that obtain 
their water supplies from lakes. 

The supply of food fish furnished by the lakes is an item of some 
importance. Our Great Lakes are especially important in this way. 
Upon the Caspian Sea the fishing industry is carried on extensively. 

In the colder parts of the temperate zone lakes furnish much ice. 
The introduction of artificial ice-plants has, of course, reduced the 
annual harvest from lakes, but in the aggregate they yet furnish 
a large supply. Not only do large companies harvest natural ice, 
but countless farmers and dairymen fill their private ice-houses with 
a supply for summer use. 

A few lakes are important because of the salt that they supply. 
There are several hundred millions of tons in Great Salt Lake, and 
a large amount of salt is harvested annually. The Caspian. Sea 
is another inland body of water from which much salt is obtained. 

STUDIES 

Compare the distribution of lakes in the United States with the former 
distribution of glaciers. Under what conditions would Great Salt Lake become 
a body of fresh water? Show that the expansion of water on freezing is of vital 
impK>rtanoe to life. Are the lakes of equatorial Africa likely to be of great 
importance in the future? Select some lake in your state, and write a paper 
on its origin and uses. 

REFERENCES 

Chamberlain, James F.: "Crater Lake.'^ Jour, of Geog.f vol. xiii, p. 9. 
Fairbanks, Harold W. : " Great Salt Lake. The Western United States," p. 1 15. 
Gannett, Henry: "Lake Chelan." Nat. Geog. Mag., vol. ix, p. 417. 
Gilbert, Grove Karl: "Lake Bonneville." Mono. I., U. S. G. S.. 
Harrington, Mark: "Lake Superior, Area and Drainage Basin of." Nat. 

Geog. Mag.y vol. viii, p. 111. 
Jefferson, Mark: "Lake Huron." Jour, of Geog. ^ vol. ii, p. 144. 
Louderback, George D.: "Lake Tahoe." Jour, of Geog. y vol ix, p. 277. 
Moran, E. L.: "The Coal Traffic of the Great Lakes," Jour, of Geog. ^ vol. xv, 

p. 150. 
Russell, I. C: "The Lakes of North America," 



CHAPTER XIII 
Glacieks 

General Statement. — How feathery the deHcate snowflakes 
appear as they slowly settle through the atmosphere and spread 
a mantle of white over the surface of the earth! Viewed through 
a microscope, each flake is observed to be hexagonal in form, although 
the variations within the hexagons are numerous. Quite different 
is the character of snow that has remained upon the ground for several 
weeks. As a result of surface melting and refreezing, as well as of 
compression, the snow has become quite granular, the granules or 
pellets being very ice-like. > 

Snowfields that endure for many years or Cjentufies* gradually, 
become consolidated into ice, and slowly move from higher to lower 
levels. These moving masaies of snow and ice, together with what- 
ever they transport, are termed glacierb. To the fields of granular 
snow which serve as the sources of glaciers the term neve is applied. 

Distribution of Glaciers. — The fertile plains in the central part 
of the United States as far south as the junction of the Ohio and the 
Missouri Rivers with the Mississippi have been at different times 
covered by a vast ice-sheet or glacier, which originated in the Hudson 
Bay region. Much of western Europe, including practically the 
entire area of the British Isles, has several times been ice covered. 
This shows clearly that these parts of the earth have undergone 
great changes in climate. The time involved represents thousands 
of years, however. 

No one can state positively the cause or causes of the ice periods. 
The conditions, whatever they may have been, were such as to 
produce lower temperatures than now exist in the formerly glaciated 
areas. Increased altitude, a variation in the inclination of the 
earth's a^iis, a decrease in the percentage of water vapor and carbon 
dioxide gas, and a change in the position of ocean currents, are all 
given as possible causes. 

At the present time permanent snow-fields are found only in 
the frigid zone and upon lofty mountains in the other zones. The line 
above which snow remains upon the ground permanently, the snow 
line, varies in altitude from about 18,000 feet in equatorial regions to 
sea level in polar areas. The altitude of this line depends chiefly 

H3 



Glaciers 145 

upon temperature and amount of precipitation. It is h^her on the 
north elope of the Himalaya Mountains than it is on the south slope, 
because the amount of snowfall is greater on the south tlian on 
the north. Although glaciers cannot originale below the snow line, 
they extend below it. 

The greatest snow-field in the world surrounds the South Pole, 
and is known as the Antarctic Ice Cap. In the Arctic regions there 
is another extensive snow-field. Practically the entire area of Green- 
land (about 800,000 square miles) is glaciex-covered. Smaller but 



™«oBy B. w.unmn. ^^ 47,— A glacier, summit of Mt. Hood. 

very extensive glaciers exist in Alaska, several of which are 50 miles 
or more in length. In the Alps there are some 2,000 glaciers, and 
in the Caucasus, Himalaya, Andes, Sierra Nevada, Cascade, Rocky 
and other lofty mountains there ai-e many small i<ailey glaciers. 

Movement of Glaciers. — Agassiz devoted much time to the study of 
the causes, the rate and the nature of glacier movement. By drivmg 
a row of stakes into the surface of a glacier and fixing their position 
with reference to some stationary point on land on either side of the 
glacier, movement, the rate of movement and the fact that the central 
part moves more .rapidly than the sides can be demonstrated. 

The movement is in all cases slow. Probably the average is 
not more than one foot per day. On steep slopes gravity is an 



146 Geography 

important cause of movement, but some glaciers are situated upon 
areas that have very little slope. In all cases melting and refreezing, 
with the consequent expansion and contraction, may be regarded 
as a primiary cause of movement. 

Ice, when placed under sufficient pressure, can be made to assume 
practically any form, which suggests that ice under this condition 
is not a solid. The movement of glaeier-ice is not, however, like 
the movement of liquids, but more like that of viscous bodies, such as 



Fin. 48.— Crevsne on Elliott GlorUr, north nde of Ht Hood. 

asphalt. A glacier adapts itself to the irr^ularities of its channel, 
and to this extent its movement is like that of a stream. Owii^ 
to the stress placed upon it, the ice develops many fissures in its 
movement. In this respect a glacier is quite uplike a stream. 

Characteristics of Glaciers. — Viewed from a distance a glacier 
generally presents a dazzling white appearance, and seems to have 
very little relief. Closer acquaintance shows that (in case of most 
glaciers) there are boulders and dirt upon the surface, and that in 
places the surface b so broken by cracks, pinnacles and well-hke 
depressions as to make travel very difficult and sometimes impossible. 

During the wanner hours of a summer day water flows in countless 



Glaciers 147 

rills over the surface of the ice. It cascades over ice precipices, and 
drops into the yawning cracks or crevasses in the ice. The crevasses 
are most numerous where the surface over which the glacier moves 
is roughest. They are the result of the strains to which the ice is 
subjected as the glacier moves along its course. Within the crevasses 
the blue tints of the ice are most beautiful. 

As*rock warms rapidly, the small stones and the dust upon the 
surface of the ice become quite warm during a sunmier day. They 
melt the ice beneath them, and consequently settle into the depres- 
sions thus formed. This process is repeated from day to day, giving 
rise to what are known as '^ust wells." Drinking at these wells is one 
of the pleasures of exploring glaciers. Large pieces of rock do not 
have time to become heated to their lower surfaces. They there- 
fore protect the ice beneath. As melting on the surface not so pro- 
tected is greater, the boulder-covered ice in time stands in' the 
form of pinnacles. 

In describing the glaciers of Spitzbergen, Lord Dufferin says: 
"A forest of their lilac peaks, so faint, so pale, that had it not been 
for the gem-like distinctness of their outline one could have deemed 
them as unsubstantial as the spires of Fairyland." 

Streams of water issue from beneath glaciers which terminate 
upon land. Sometimes, as in the case of the Bossons Glacier in 
France, and the Great Glacier of the lUicillewaet in British Columbia, 
the streams issue from ice-caves of considerable size. One may enter 
these caves and thus see the conditions that exist in and under glaciers. 

The front of a glacier, the icefoot, may be very steep and high, 
or the slope may be very gentle. By means 9f an ice-pick one 
can cut steps in the ice, and thus ascend a steep slope. Travel over 
the surface of the ice is greatly facilitated by the use of ice-picks. 
Woolen stockings drawn over one's shoes prevent slipping. 

Where glaciers end in the sea, the ice, as it moves forward, is 
buoyed up by the water and breaks up into icebergs. The icebergs 
float out to sea, and are a great menace to vessels. Only about 
one-eighth part of an iceberg is above water. The mass of a berg 
projecting 50 feet above the water may therefore be very great. 
The Titanic disaster was caused by collision with an iceberg. Ice- 
bergs chill the atmosphere which comes in contact with them, thus 
causing fogs. As large numbers of icebergs float over the Grand 
Banks, this is a very foggy part of the ocean. Numerous fishing 
boats frequent this region, and accidents are frequent. 

Results of Glacier Movement. — In consequence of the movement 



148 Geogiuphy 

of glaciers there is friction between the ice and the rock with which 
the glacier is in contact. As the ice is in some cases hundreds of 
feet in thickness, the friction at the bottom of the glacier is enormous. 
Rocks are torn from the aides of the valley, and are carried fonvard 
by the ice, or are pushed before it. Some of the material which falls 
upon the surface of the glacier finds its way down into the crevasses. 
Thus it happens that material is pushed in front of the \Be, and 
carried upon and within the ice. The boulders which are imbedded 
within the ice polish the rock over which the glacier passes, and often 
leave parallel scratches called stricE upon the rock. 



Fro. 49.— An iceborg. Note the gladsr in the diatanee. 

The law governing the transportive power of streams does not 
apply to glaciers. Hence materials of all sizes are transported side 
by side and at the same rate. They are dropped in the same unas- 
sorted condition when the ice melts. As water-borne material is 
assorted, the presence of a mantle of unassorted waste is strongly 
suggestive of the former presence of glaciers in the area. 

Glaciers widen and deepen valleys. The fiords described on page 
158 have been acted upon by ice, as has the Yosemite and many 
other similar valleys. Rock basins are enlarged, and perhaps in 
some cases formed, by glacial erosion. 

Glacial Deposits. — Streams deposit material at one time which 
may at another be picked up and carried a considerable distance. 



Glaciers 149 

The same is true of glaciers. The load of the glacier is finally thrown 
down where the ice melts, that is, at fche termination of the glacier, 
unless the glacier ends in a body of water. The material which 
accumulates at the foot of the glacier is known as a terminal moraine. 
If the ice front remains practically stationary for a long term of 
years the terminal moraine will be in the form of a ridge. The position 
of the ice front varies somewhat from season to season and from 
year to year. 

When a glacier finally retreats from an area the surface of the 
land is covered with boulders, gravel and fine material. This is 
called glacial drift. Fig. 46 shows the extent of the drift-covered 
area in North America. 

Influence of Glaciers Upon Life. — ^Perhaps the greatest influence 
of glaciers upon human life is found in their relations to agriculture. 
In our North Central States the drift is in some places many feet 
in thickness. A great work was done here by way of preparing the 
soil for the use of man, for the rock was relatively easily eroded. 
The pulverized condition of the soil, as well as its depth, has made 
available much material for plant use. The decreased relief of the 
land due to glaciation favors the use of farm machinery. The 
value of land in glaciated countries is, as a rule, much greater than 
that in non-glaciated countries, where other conditions are very 
similar. In New England the drift is more largely in the form of 
boulders. These are a detriment to agriculture. For generations 
the farmers have piled them up and built them into walls and the 
foundations of houses and barns. 

As the ice moved over the land much material was deposited 
in stream valleys. The blocking of streams led to the formation 
of rapids and falls, and in some cases to a change in the course of 
the streams. In New England many falls originated in this way. 
These now furnish power and light, and were very instrumental in 
giving to New England in early days her supreiiiacy as a manufac- 
turing district. 

Great numbers of lakes in North America and in Europe have 
resulted from glacial dams thrown across streams. These are valuable 
from many points of view. Some furnish a water supply. In most 
of them there are fish of some value. Those that are of considerable 
size influence the climate of their leeward shores. They furnish 
situations for resorts, and are thus of value to many classes of people. 
In the colder parts of the world, ice is harvested upon them during 
the winter. 



150 Geography 

As the general effect of glacier deposition is to reduce the relief, 
a result of glaciation is to make the construction of roads easier 
than it would otherwise have been. This is illustrated in the central 
part of the United States, in the adjacent parts of Canada and in 
western Europe. 

Gravel taken from moraines is used upon roads and in the manu- 
facture of cement. Brick, tile and pottery are extensively manufac- 



tured from "rock flour." The valley of the Hudson and the region 
about Chicago illustrate this use of a natural resource. 

Glaciers a.s features of scenic interest attract people in large num- 
bers, and therefore have an important economic relation to man. 
They also have a value which cannot be measured in this way, 
Switzerland has for a long time derived large sums of money annually' 
from tourists, and the glaciers are one of the attractions of Switzer- 
land. More recently Alaska has been claiming attention as a pleasure 
resort. Many of her glaciers can be seen from the decks of the 
excursion steamers. Some of the glaciers in the Selkirk Mountains 
in British Columbia are very beautiful, and <|uite accessible. The 



Glaciers 151 

foot of the great glacier of the lUicillewaet is but 45 minutes' walk 
from the station at Glacier. One of the great attractions of Glacier 
National Park is the large number of glaciers and glacier lakes. 

We are now in a position to appreciate what Shelley says concern- 
ing glaciers: 

"The glaciers creep, 

Like snakes that watch their prey, from their far fountains, 

Slowly rolling on; there many a precipice 

Frost and the Sun in scorn of mortal power 

Have piled — dome, pyramid and pinnacle, 

A city of death, distinct with many a tower • 

And wall impregnable of beaming ice; 

Yet not a city, but a flood of ruin 

Is there, that from the boundaries of the sky 

Rolls its perpetual stream; vast pines are strewing 

Its destii^ed path, or in the mangled soil 

Branchless and shattered stand; the rocks, drawn down 

From yon remote waste, have overthrown 

The tenants of the dead and living world, 

Never to be reclaimed."^ 

STUDIES 

On a map of the world locate the great permanent snow-fields. Explain 
their distribution. How is the former extent of the ice-sheet in the United States 
known? Why is there so much difference between the surface features of different 
glaciers and between the different parts of the surface of the same glacier? Do 
streams issue from beneath all glaciers? Write a paper showing how glaciers 
have influenced himian life in some particular locality. On a base map of the 
United States chart from memory the former and the present distribution of 
glaciers. The results of glacier action are a detriment to the farmers of New 
England, but the farmers of the Middle West profit because of the results of ice 
action in that area. Explain. 

REFERENCES 

Chamberlin and Salisbury: "Earth History," vol. iii, p. 327. 
Cleland, Herdman F.: "Geology, Physical and Historical," chapter v. 
Gilbert, Grove Karl : * * Glaciers and Glaciation of Alaska . ' ' Harriman A Idskan 

Expedition, vol iii. 
Russell, I. C: "The Glaciers of North America." 
SciDMORB, Eliza: "The Discovery of Glacier Bay, Alaska." Nat. Geog. Mag., 

vol. 7, p. 140. 
Whitbeck,. R. H.: "Ihe Glacial Period and the Modem Geography." Jour, of 

Geog., vol ii, p. 20. 

1 Shelley: "Mont Blanc." 



CHAPTER XIV 
The Soil 

General Statement. — The soil is the most important of all natural 
resources, for upon it, either directly or indirectly, all life depends. 
Popularly the term soil refers to the loose material that mantles 
the solid rock of the earth. Soil varies as to composition, texture, 
color, depth and fertility. 

Origin of Soils. — Soil is chiefly ground-up rock. Imagine the 
soil to be removed from a given area so that a bare rock surface 
is exposed. The heat of the day expands the rock slightly, while 
the low temperature of the night causes a slight contraction. Thus 
little by little the surface of the rock is chipped and shattered. Into 
the tiny openings, found in all rock, water penetrates, and when it 
freezes it exerts a powerful pressure, often sufficient to rend masses 
of considerable size. Upon the surface of the rock lichens, plants 
which have no true roots, obtaining their nourishment from the air, 
establish themselves. These slowly form soil, both by aiding rock 
disintegration and through their own 'decay. In time larger plants 
and even trees establish themselves upon the rock. They extend 
their roots into the crevices and cracks, exerting a tremendous force, 
adequate at times to pry off great slabs many feet in length. The 
openings, enlarged by the roots, offer still greater opportunity for 
the penetration of water. 

Each piece of rock broken from a larger mass is acted upon by 
the weather and by plants still more rapidly than it was before 
being detached, because of the increased area exposed. It is finally 
reduced to the condition of soil. 

Every stream is one of Nature's mills in which rock is being 
slowly but constantly ground. As we go down stream we observe 
a larger and larger proportion of fine material because the rock 
has been in the mill for a longer time than has that in the upper 
part of the stream, and has been transported a greater distance. 
When the stream finally reaches the body of water into which it 
empties, it deposits first the coarser materials — gravel and sand — 
and later, that is, farther out, the clayey material is laid down. 
Along every sea and fake shore the waves are battering down the 
cliffs, rolling the rocks and pebbles back and forth along the beach, 
and thus gradually reducing them to fine material. 

152 



The Soil 153 

Glaciers, in their slow march down mountain slopes and across 
plains, exert an almost irresistible force upon the surfaces over which 
they pass. They tear boulders from the mountains; they drag them 
over the rock, breaking the comers, wearing them down, and reducing 
some of them to a powder called "rock flour" or "glacier flour." 



Fia. 51,— H«o(s of tree breaking rook. 

Even the winds do their part in the soil-making process, for they 
hurl sand grains against the rocks and so erode them into most fan- 
tastic forms. Their work is, of course, most important in arid regions. 

Burrowing animals, such as rabbits, squirrels, gophers, and even 
earthworms, bring to the surface subsoil and bits of rock which 
are still further acted upon by the atmosphere. Darwin found that 
in parts of England more than ten tons of earth on each acre annually 
pass through the bodies of earthworms. This work does much to 
prepare the soil for the use of plants. "The plough is one of the 
most ancient and moat valuable of man's inventions ; but long before 
he existed the land was in fact regularly ploughed, and still continues 
to be thus ploughed by earthworms. It may be doubted whether 



154 Geography 

there are many other animals which have played so important a 
part in the history of the world as these lowly organized creatures.'** 

Thus streams, waves, glaciers, winds, changes in temperature, 
surface and ground water, plants and animals are steadily working, 
creating soil from the rocks of the earth's crust. Without the 
work of these agents life would not be possible upon the earth. 

Soil is, then, chiefly ground-up rock, sometimes 95 per cent, being 
mineral, with the addition of some organic matter derived from the 
decay of plant and animal life. This organic material gives the dark 
color to the soil which is usually seen in the forests, meadows and 
boggy places. 

Kinds of Soil. — Soils are often classed as sandy, loamy and clayey. 
A sandy soil is lightj that is, it is easily cultivated. A clayey soil is 
called heavy because it is not easily worked. When a soil contains 
considerable vegetable mould it is called loamy, 

A <Slayey soil, being composed of fine particles, generally contains 
much plant food, and being close in texture holds water. Hence 
clayey soils are usually productive or strong. They also withstand 
drought well. A sandy soil, being composed of the larger particles 
and not a good retainer .of water, is generally less productive, and 
not well adapted to conditions of drought. 

A soil formed by the decay of the rock underlying it is often called 
a residual soil, meaning that the soil is that part of the decayed 
rock that was not washed away. Soil that did not originate in the 
place where it is found is called transported soil. Soils are transported 
by rivers, glaciers and winds. Drijt is a term commonly applied 
to glacier transported soils, alluvial to soils deposited by running 
water, and eolian to soils deposited by the winds. The deltas of 
the Mississippi, the Colorado, the Po, the Ganges, the Hoang-ho, 
the Nile, and others, are composed of alluvial soils. In these, and 
other cases, the soil is fertilized each year by floods. 

Natural Fertility. — ^There is much variation in the fertility of 
soils. Some, like those of the deltas of the rivers mentioned above,' 
are practically inexhaustible, because with the annual flooding of 
the rivers, sediments are brought down and deposited. The lime- 
stone soils of the blue-grass region of Kentucky are noted for their 
fertility. Ages ago, when the waves of the sea rolled over this region, 
minute forms of marine life extracted from the water carbonate 
of lime, and built it into their bodies. In time the limy portions 

» Darwin: "Formation of Vegetable Mould/' p. 91. 



The Soil 155 

of these and other larger creatures collected on the sea floor and were 
converted into limestone. Elevation brought this part of the sea 
bottom above the water. The slow process of decay already outlined 
converted some of this limestone into soil, which nourishes vegetation 
for the use of man and beast. Thus is represented an interesting 
cycle from ocean water to human life. In Alabama, Mississippi, 
Louisiana and Texas there is a belt of fertile limestone soils. This 
is the great cotton belt of the South. 

In the eastern part of Kentucky and Tennessee the underlying 
rock is sandstone, the decay of which contributes little plant food to 
the resulting soil. In this section agriculture does not flourish, and 
the population is sparse. It must not be inferred from this that all 
sandstone soils are infertile. Soils resulting from the decay of silicious 
sandstones are infertile, and sandstones always produce light soils. 

The soil of New England was, even in Colonial times, considered 
infertile. It was said "not even a hill of com can be grown unless 
a fish be placed in it." Here the resistant granite rock has weathered 
slowly. Even the glacier did not grind it up as it did the less resistant 
limestone of the Mississippi valley. The coarseness of the material 
is not without its advantage, however, for the slow decay of the pebbles, 
boulders and rock masses contributes the elements needed by plant 
life. Thus the cultivation of this soil tends to increase its fertility, 
for it furthers the process of rock disintegration, liberating the potash, 
soda, lime and phosphorus. Granite soils are usually rich in potash. 

Glacial soil, which is fine in texture, is very fertile. " The fineness 
of the glacier flour renders it peculiarly suitable for the rapid con- 
version into soil, and such soils are usually excellent and remarkably 
durable. The great and lasting fertility of the soils of southern 
Sweden is traced directly to this mode of origin, and doubtless the 
great American ice sheet of glacier times is similarly concerned in 
the high quality of the soil of our north central states, from the Ohio 
to the Great Lakes and the Missouri."^ When a lake disappears 
its floor generally is found to be very fertile soil, for upon it were 
deposited, at least at some distance from shore, the fine materials 
held in suspension by the stream or streams that flowed into the lake. 
The former floor of the now extinct Lake Agassiz is one of the richest 
wheat-growing districts in the world. 

The soil in arid regions is usually non-productive because of lack 
of rainfall, and not because of lack of fertility. There are sections, 



Hilgard: "Soils," p. 5. 



166 Geography 

however, where, owing to alkaU, the soil cannot be used for general 
agriculture until the alkali has been washed away or partially ex- 
hausted by the growing of plants, such as the sugar beet, tolerant 
of alkali. 

The extent and the fertility of the soil exert a marked effect 
upon the economic geography of the world. The great food-producing 
areas are these having a fertile soil, and some of these support a 
very dense population. The delta lands of China and India are 
excellent examples. 

"The Great Plain of the Hoang-ho delta, partly surrounding 
the mountainous Shan-tung peninsula, and the great delta of the 
Yangtze, make up the only large plain areas in China. Though 
large in themselves (their combined areas being equivalent to the 
states of Ohio, Indiana, Illinois and Kentucky) these plains occupy 
scarcely one-eighth of China's surface. They support, however, 
fully forty per cent, of China's vast population, and furnish in addition 
a large proportion of her exported crops. ' '^ The ^ ' Black Earth' ' region 
in Russia supports a large population. The productiveness of our 
North Central States is remarkable. As has been said, this is thought 
to be due to the glacier flour deposited by the ice sheet that formerly 
covered the region. The fertility of the soil of these states is to no 
small extent responsible for a tremendous lake and land commerce, 
and for the development of the region generally. 

STUDIES 
Was there a period when there was no soil upon the earth? Explain the 
formation of soil. What is the nature of the soil in your locality? Is it residual 
or transported? What is its average depth? Why do soils become exhausted? 
Compare sandstone and limestone soils as to fertility. How can the loss of soil 
as a result of stream action be checked? 

REFERENCES 

Downing, E. R.: ** Saving the Soil." Lessons in Community and National Life, 

Community Leaflet No. 5. Nov. 1, 1917. 
Fletcher, S. W. : ''Soils." 
HiLGARD, Eugene W.: "Soils." 
King, F. H.: "The Soil." 

Merrill, George P.: "Rocks, Rock Weathering and Soils." 
McGee, W. J.: "Soil Erosion." Bulletin 71, U. S. Bureau of Soils. 
Semple, Ellen C. : " Mountain Peoples in Relation to Their Soils." Jour. Geog., 

vol. iv, p. 417. 
Snyder, Harry: "Soils and Fertilizers." 

^ Roorbach, G. B.: Journal of Geography, vol. xi, p. 47. 



CHAPTER XV 

The Ocean 

Tlie Coast Line. — ^The margin of the sea is a zone of great 
activity on the part of both Nature and man. Here the tremendous 
energy of the waves is expended in battering down even the most 



resistant ciiffs, and here stream, wave and shore current spread out 
upon the continental shelf vast quantities of sediment. 

Along; the margin of the sea countless ships daily unload commodi- 
ties and people brought from distant shores, only to be reloaded with 
freight and passengers bound for other ports. Most of the great 
cities of the world are situated on or near the mai^in of the sea. 

There are few countries that possess no coast line. Paraguay, 
Bolivia, Switzerland and Serbia are striking exceptions. The 
craving on the part of nations for frontage upon the sea is as great 
as that of individuals for frontage upon the streets of the cities. 

The character of the line formed by the meeting of the land and 



158 Geography 

the sea plays an important part in promoting or retarding the devel- 
opment of an area. An irregular coast line offers, as a rule, great 
advantages for the establishment of seaports, and consequently 
for the easy exchange of commodities, for the growth of industry 
and commerce, and for the spread of all that comes under the broad 
title of culture. A regular coast line is generally deficient in good 
harbors; hence an extensive sea commerce can only be developed 
at great cost. 

Examples of Irregular Coasts. — Of all the continents Europe 
possesses the most irregular coast line, having one mile of coast line 
to 150 square miles of her area. North America is a close second, 
her ratio being one to about 164. Germany has one mile of coast 
to about 160 square miles, but in Norway the ratio is 1 to 10. 

One can travel by ship from Seattle northward for a distance 
of approximately 1,000 miles, and during almost the entire voyage 
be within a channel but a few miles in width. On the east are the 
wooded slopes of the mountains of the mainland, and on the west 
innumerable timbered islands. The winding channel constantly 
discloses new scenes of beauty as the ship forges ahead. 

Many small valleys, the seaward parts of which have a great 
depth of water, are tributary to the channel. These inlets are 
relatively narrow and have steep sides, sometimes rising to a con- 
siderable distance above the water. Inlets of this character are termed 
fiords. Southern Chile, Scotland, Norway, New Zealand and Maine 
present other illustrations of fiorded coast lines. 

Influence of Irregular Coasts. — It was long ago pointed out by 
Guybt that there is some relation between the extent of coast pos- 
sessed by an area iand the developmenit of that area. Europe is the 
most highly developed of the continents, andj -as has been stated, 
it has the most irregular coast. Not all areas having irregular 
coast lines are highly developed, however. 

In the case of Europe the land and the water are in contact at 
so many points that no part of the continent is very far from the 
ocean. This contact with the sea did much to foster the fishing 
industry and to promote discovery, and today it is of vast commercial 
importance. In yet another important way Europe benefits by 
her irregularity of coast. The climate is more equable than it 
would be were the coast line regular. 

No point in the British Isles is more than 100 miles from the sea. 
The great importance of this is evident. The cost of getting the 
exports to the sea is reduced to the minimum, and the expense of 



160 Geography 

sliipping the imports from one point in the islands to any other is 
correspondingly small. In these islands alone we have the well- 
known seaports of Queenstown, Dublin, Belfast, Glasgow, Edin- 
burgh, Newcastle, Hull, London, Dover, Southampton, Bristol, 
Liverpool, and others. This condition gives the British Isles an 
advantage over Germany, some of whose cities are 400 miles from 
the sea. 

As both lumbering and fishing are miportant in Norway, her 
irregular coast is of great value in these industries. Most of the 
people live close to the sea, the towns and cities being situated upon 
the fiords. The nature of the coast is such that a road connecting 
two points along the sea is likely to be several times as long as a 
water route connecting the two. On this account, travel by row- 
boats is more common than travel by means of wheeled vehicles. 

Southern Alaska does not profit as much by her irregularity of coast 
line as does Norway. This is in part because the back country, 
owing to severity of climate, is not productive, and in part because 
civilization is young. As in Norway, however, there are fishing vil- 
lages on the fiords, and these furnish the connecting link between 
the interior of Alaska and the outside world. The beauty of the fiord 
coast is yearly attracting a larger number of tourists to Alaska, just 
as the better known fiords of Norway have for a long time drawn 
visitors to her shores. A fiord coast necessitates a large number 
of lights, the maintenance of which is a considerable financial burden. 
Along the coast of southern Alaska there are many lights which 
burn continuously for a period of six months. Along irreg- 
ular coasts that are well supplied with seaports, there are many 
life-saving stations. 

Examples of Regular Coasts. — The regularity of the coast of 
Africa is remarkable. No other continent possesses such a limited 
extent of coast line in proportion to area. Nowhere do bays pene- 
trate the land deeply; nowhere do projections extend far into the 
sea. The lack of good harbors is proverbial. Arabia and India 
present great regularity of coast. The coast of Peru is very deficient 
in harbors. California stretches from the latitude of Boston to that 
of Charleston, South Carolina, yet has very few good harbors. 

Influence of Regular Coasts. — The St. Lawrence, the Hudson 
and the Mississippi are natural gateways leading into North America. 
By means of the Orinoco, the Amazon and the Parana, explorers 
reached the interior of South America. In the whole coast of Africa 
no such gateways exist. This is one reason for the tardy develop- 




ir-^ 



#' 



■f 



\ \ 



Fia. 54.— A rpKular <^ou 



lU. S. Ged. Survey.) 



162 Geography 

ment of the continent. Australia's coast line is broken by but one 
river of considerable size (the Murray), and this is of very little 
commercial importance. 

So regular is the coast and so shallow the water on the seaward 
side of Texas that Galveston was established upon an island of sand — 
a position in other respects very unfavorable. The coasts of Peru 
and northern Chile are so deficient in good harbors that ships in 
some places are obliged to load and unload their cargoes by means 
of lighters. MoUendo and Antofagasta are illustrations. 

Depths of Harbors. — ^In these days of great ocean liners the impor- 
tance of seaports depends, in very large measure, upon the number 
of feet of water in their harbors. In the early history of our country, 
Salem, Massachusetts, exceeded Boston in commercial importance, 
but as ships of greater draught were built, the commerce of Salem 
declined in favor of that of Boston, where deeper water existed. 

In order to accommodate the greatest ocean-going vessels a 
harbor must have more than 40 feet of water. New York, Boston, 
San Francisco, Rio de Janerio, London, Liverpool, Southampton, 
Queenstown, Le Havre, Hamburg, Antwerp and Sidney are among 
the deep harbors of the world. 

The value of a harbor is in part determined by the tidal range. 
If, for example, the depth of water in a certain harbor is 35 feet at 
high tide and 25 feet at low tide, many ships could enter and clear 
at high tide which otherwise could not carry on commerce with the 
port unless they employed lighters. The tidal range in the estuary 
of the Severn is 40 feet. This is a great advantage to Bristol. 

A tidal time-table and knowledge of the amount of tidal range 
in every port is of the greatest importance to mariners. Such infor- 
mation is published for their benefit. 

So vital is the matter of depth that vast sums of money have 
been expended to increase the depth of harbors. The work of dredg- 
ing must be repeated from time to time, because streams, waves, 
currents and tides deposit much material in some harbors. The 
Ambrose Channel in New York harbor has cost about $6,000,000. 
Some $20,000,000 have been expended upon the harbor at Dover. 
At Cherbourg and Brest, France, at Antwerp, and at many other 
places large sums have been spent for deepening harbors. 

Another point of great importance in harbors is area. In this 
respect Rio de Janerio, Sydney, New York, and San Francisco are 
noteworthy. Where space is limited, breakwaters are sometimes 
constructed, inside of which ships find safe anchorage. 



The Ocean 163 

) Shipping. — Much of the money that goes into 
harbor improvement is used for the protection of shipping. Sea 
walls are constructed, ligbt-houaes, buoys, bells, and a life-saving 
service established; forts are built and subniarine mines planted. 

Climate as Related to the Value of a Coast Line. — ^A country 
may have a great extent of coast line and yet not derive much benefit 
from it because of a short open season. Russia furnishes an excellent 
illustration. Along her whole northern coast there is not a harbor 
that is naturally free from ice during the entire winter. Alexandrosk 



Fia 65.— Work of waves. La Jolla. Calil. 

and Kola are open most of the time, however. The same is true of 
the harbors on the Baltic. Even at Vladivostok the harbor would 
be closed for a part of the year were it not for the fact that ice- 
breakers are employed. 

The northern ports of Germany suffer from the same cause, but not 
to the same extent, although ice-breakers are employed at Stettin. 
Owing to the fact that the St. Lawrence is ice-bound for several 
months each year, a considerable portion of Canada's commerce 
is during this period deflected to Halifax, Nova Scotia, and Port- 
land, Maine, 

Influences Shaping Coast Line.— One who has witnessed the 
waves beating upon a shore must have realized that they have much 
to do with shaping coast lines. On the western coast of the British 
Isles waves have been known to strike with a force of three tons 



164 Geography 

to the square foot, and the average winter force on that coast is 
about one ton per square foot. 

It is evident that, as a result of their repeated attacks, waves can 
cause to crumble even the most resistant rocks. Waves, Uke running 
water, use rocks, pebbles and sand grains as their tools. Projections 
are cut away and indentations filled with sediment. Thus the 
ultimate effect of wave erosion is to make a coast hne more regular. 



The rate at which a shore line is eaten back is often increased 
by under-cutting, which causes overhanging rock masses to fall. 
Where rocks are tilted, the irregularities due to erosion are likely 
to be greater than where the rocks are horizontal. 

The constructive work of streams is of some importance in chang- 
ing shore lines, hence in a local way in changing economic conditions. 
The city of Adria, as stated elsewhere, was once a port on the Adri- 
atic Sea, but it is now 14 miles inland. The Rhone is advancing 
its delta at the rate of 200 feet per year. The northern coast of the 
Gulf of Mexico was once far north of its present location. 

Diastrophic movements (page 139) leave unmistakable evi- 
dences along shore lines. Subsidence along a continental shelf 
pushes the coast line landward. The valleys are depressed below 
the level of the sea, are filled with water, and are therefore said to 



The Ocean 165 

be drowned. The hills and ridges that are not submerged form 
capes, peninsulas and islands. 

The land is acted upon by many agents of erosion, but the sea 
floor is protected by the water. Therefore a land surface is more 
irregular than the sea floor. After subsidence the new shore line 
which is located upon a former land area is more irregular than it 
was before the subsidence occurred. We have, then, this general 
law : subsidence of a continental shelf increases the irregviarity of the 
coast line resulting from such subsidence. 

The wonderfully beautiful coasts of Norway and southern Alaska 
owe their character in large part to a drowning of the regions. In 
both cases glaciers have played a part in deepening and widening 
the fiords. A sinking of the land gave to eastern North America 
north of New Jersey a very irregular coast. What was before this 
event the seaward portion of the Hudson valley now exists as a 
submerged canyon, which has been traced along the present conti- 
nental shelf for more than 100 miles. It was the drowning of the 
Hudson valley which produced the splendid harbor upon which New 
York City is situated, and a waterway having a minimum depth 
of 11 feet as far north as Albany. The St. Lawrence valley was 
drowned for a distance of 200 miles inland from its present mouth. 
This made Quebec in effect a seaport. 

When as a result of elevation a continental shelf, or part of it, 
is raised above the level of the sea, the resulting coast line is estab- 
lished upon the former sea floor. As has been said, the sea floor 
is little influenced by the agents of erosion ; moreover, the streams 
are bringing to it the waste of the land, which tends to obliterate 
irregularities. Consequently the new shore line will be more regular 
than the old. Elevation of continental shelves increases the regularity 
oj coast lines. 

Not infrequently, along a coast that has been uplifted, the terraces 
cut by wave action as the water stood at successive levels remain 
as proof of the elevation. At many points along the coast such ter- 
races may be seen. 

The coral polyp plays- its parf in fashioning shore lines. The 
Florida Keys are of coral formation, and these have made possible 
the construction of a railroad connecting Key West with the main- 
land. The Barrier Reef, off the eastern coast of Australia, is about 
1,000 miles in length, and averages about 30 miles from the mainland. 
It protects the channel between it and the continent, and is thus of 
considerable importance to commerce. 



166 Geography 

The Ocean Basin. — The ocean covers about three-fourths of the 
earth 's surface, the average depth of the water being about 23^ miles, 
and the greatest known depth about 30,000 feet. Although the depth 
of the ocean is very great, it is slight in proportion to its width. 
The topography of the ocean floor is much less varied than is that 
of the land. This is due to the absence of agents of erosion, and to 
constant deposition of sediments upon the floor. 

Temperature of the Ocean. — ^As water heats and cools slowly, 
the great volume of the ocean causes it to have a marked effect upon 
the temperature of the lands, especially the coastal areas toward 
which the winds blow.' Summers are cooler and winters warmer 
than they would be were the volume of the ocean less than it is. 

The fact that the heat of the sun is applied to the surface of the 
water is an important reason why the temperature at considerable 
depths is always low. The decrease in temperature with increase 
in depth is not uniform, being most rapid near the surface. On the 
floor of the deepest parts of the ocean in all latitudes the temperature 
is below 32*^ F., yet the water is not frozen. This is due to its salinity 
and the great pressure. 

Light. — Except for phosphorescent light, the depths of the ocean 
are in constant darkness. In fact, sunlight penetrates but a short 
distance below the surface. Many of the animals at great depths 
are eyeless, but others are supplied with the organs of sight. 

Pressure^ — ^At sea level, as already explained, the average pres- 
sure of the atmosphere is 14.7 pounds per square inch. Pressure 
increases at the rate of about three atmospheres for each 100 feet 
of descent. This means that one mile below the surface of the ocean 
the pressure is about one ton per square inch. 

Life. — ^The uniformly low temperature conditions, the absence 
of light, and the enormous pressure are all unfavorable to the develop- 
ment of life forms of a high order of intelligence. The life is most 
abundant relatively near shore, for there the food washed in 
from the lands is most plentiful, and temperature conditions are most 
favorable. Many of the forms are of great' value to man, and 
most of these have been treated elsewhere. Others are: lobsters, 
turtles, corals, sponges and pearl oysters. 

Knowledge of temperature and pressure conditions at great 
depths is obtained by means of self-recording instruments. Small 
nets lowered to considerable distances and dragged behind vessels 
capture some of the life forms, but naturally our knowledge of ocean 
life is very incomplete. 



The Ocean 167 

Waves. — ^Waves are caused by the winds, and the greater the 
velocity of the wind the higher the waves. Although there appears 
to be a transference of water this is not the case except near shore. 
It is the motion that is transmitted; the particles of water simply 
rise and fall. Proof of this can be obtained by throwing a stick out 
from shore and observing its movements. The importance of waves 
is treated elsewhere in this chapter. 

Ocean Currents. — The winds cause currents as v/ell as tides. 
Where the winds are most constant, namely, in the trepical zone, 
the currents are best developed. The direction of the currents is, 
of course, greatly modified by the outlines of the continents and by 
islands. Currents are both warm and cold, the cold currents moving 
from higher to lower latitudes. Owing to the fact that cold water 
is more dense than the warm water, much of the former is transferred 
equatorward below the surface water. Although ocean currents have 
some effect upon climate, their influence has been greatly exaggerated. 
The volume of our largest ocean currents is very slight as compared 
with' that of the ocean, and it is to the latter that the moderating 
influence is chiefly due. Before the days of steamships the ocean 
currents were more important to navigators than they are today. 

Tides. — In the open ocean the tides have no importance, but 
along the shore they are closely related to human affairs. This 
relationship is discussed in Chapter XXXIV. 

STUDIES 

How far is each of the f oUowiag from a seaport : Leeds, Bradford. Manchester, 
Sheffield, Birmingham? What is the commercial significance of this? Why does 
our government spend so much money in guarding life and property on the 
New England coast? Make a list of our harbors which have a depth of 25 feet 
or more. What special advantage does Southampton, England, derive from the 
tides? Is Sitka, Alaska, ever ice-bound? Explain. If the floors of the ocean 
were uncovered, how would they appear? Is the salinity of the ocean changing? 
Explain. Of what advantage to man is the great extent of water surface? Can 
the ships that were sunk during the World War be salvaged? 

REFERENCES 

Cleland, Hbrdman F.: "Geology, Physical and Historical," chapter vi. 
Keib, MavCOLm: "Some Influences of the Sea Upon the Industries of New 

England." Geographical Review y chapter v, p. -399. 
"Ocean and Land Transportation." Jour, of Geog.f vol. iv, p. 329. 
Salisbury, R. D.: "Physiography: Advanced Course," pp. 317-333. 
Shaler, N. S.: "Sea and Land." 
Thompson, Sir Wyvillb: "The Depths of the Sea/* 



PART. TWO 

AGRICULTURE AND AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS 

CHAPTER XVI 

The Response of the Soil 

General Statement — ^The fruits, berries and nuts of thie forest, 
as well as such animals as could be captured, supplied primitive man 
with food. As time passed he learned to assist Nature by cultivating 
the soil. How early agriculture began is not known, but it has been 
practiced in China, Egypt, and other parts of the East for many 
centuries. Probably the women were the first tillers of the soil, 
as this custom would leave the men free to hunt and fight. 

For hundreds of years it has been the custom for the ruler of 
China to appear before his people on a certain day each year and 
devote a few minutes to plo^^ing. In Peking, China, there is an 
ancient and imposing building called the Temple of Agriculture. 
These two facts show that in China tilling the soil is regarded as an 
honorable occupation. Indeed it has long been regarded by the 
Chinese as the most honorable of callings. 

All life depends for maintenance primarily upon the soil. This 
is well illustrated by the familiar expression "Mother Earth." 
Although our food consists of both animal and vegetable matter, 
animals depend directly or indirectly upon plants for their food. 
Causing the earth to bring forth food for man is, therefore, the basal 
occupation of the human race. 

In all countries which are to any considerable extent inhabited, 
agriculture is important, but some countries are preeminently 
agricultural. Proper temperature conditions, a minimum of 20 
inches of precipitation annually, fertile soil, and a moderately even 
surface are the conditions which are highly favorable. Argentine 
Republic, Russia, Hungary, France, Belgium, India, China, Canada, 
and the United States are countries in which agriculture is very 
extensively developed. In China, British India, Hungary and 
European Russia more than one-half of the total population are 
engaged in the pursuit of agriculture. In British India, Belgium, 
France and Hungary about one-half of the total area is under the 

169 



170 Geography 

plow. On the other hand, although about one-third of the people 
of Norway are engaged in agriculture, less than five per cent, of the 
area is actually tilled. 

Until quite recently the idea 'prevailed in this country that no 
preparation was necessary for the woYk of tilling the soil. Moreover, 
there was a marked tendency to abandon the rural districts and move 
into the cities, where wages were higher and life more attractive. 
We now recognize that there is a science of agriculture, and that 
the most satisfactory results can be obtained only by those who 
have some knowledge of the plants to be cultivated, of soil, of climate 
and of the relation of each of these to the others. ^^The activities 
of our age ia lines of research have reached the tillers of the soil and 
inspired them with ambition to know more of the principles that 
govern the forces of Nature with which they have to deal.''^ 

One of the very interesting and hopeful changes in our educational 
system was the introduction of agriculture as a definite line of study. 
We have agricultural colleges in all parts of the country, and agri- 
culture is taught in very many public high schools, and in some 
special schools of secondary grade. In addition, some of the elements 
of agriculture are taught in the elementary schools. Indeed, the 
work of the pupils in these schools has, in some sections, been respon- 
sible for study on the part of adults, and for an actual improvement 
in quaUty and quantity of the crops. 

Government Aid. — Through the establishment of a Department 
of Agriculture our government has recognized the importance of the 
scientific tilling of the soil. No other government does as much as 
does ours along this line. Largely through its efforts, the wealth 
annually produced upon our farms has increased enormously during 
recent years. For the five-year period ending with 1916 the average 
value of our crops was, in round numbers, $6,800,000,000. For 
carrying on the work of the Department of Agriculture more than 
$25,000,000 was appropriated for the year ending June 30, 1918. 

Soil surveys have done much to enable farmers to make the best 
use of their farms. Since 1900 our government has extended the 
soil survey over large areas, classifying them as to origin and con- 
stitution of the soil, and stating the crops to which they are best 
adapted. Soil maps of the areas are published, and these may be 
secured from the Department of Agriculture at Washington. 

The Bureau of Plant Industry — a branch of the Department of 

^jRoosevelt, Theodore : Message to Congress, Dec. 8, 1904. 



The Response op the Soil 171 

Agriculture — has experts in all parts of the country studying the 
special problems in each locality. The pests with which the farmer 
has to contend, and the diseases that attack his plants, are given the 
most painstaking attention. In addition, plants are brought from 
foreign lands and tried where it is believed that their cultivation 
will be successful. In most cases the cost of these investigations 
is trifling compared with the returns. 

The date has been introduced into southeastern California and 
Arizona, and is being very successfully cultivated. Long staple 
cotton is being grown in the Imperial valley, California, and in the 
Salt River valley of Arizona. Durum wheat was brought from 
northern Africa and Russia and planted in our semi-arid belt east 
of the Rocky Mountains. Large areas which formerly were waste 
places now produce abundant crops of this drought-resisting wheat. 
Tea-growing is now a success in North Carolina. New varieties 
of tobacco, rice, oranges, olives, oats and many other plants have 
been introduced. 

The Bureau of Animal Industry carries on a similar work in its 
field. As a result of its studies we produce more and better wool 
per sheep than formerly. Cattle are bred so as to yield more or richer 
milk, thus greatly increasing the value of the dairy output. Similarly 
beef, pork, and mutton have been improved. Horses are success- 
fully bred for the purposes of developing speed or value as draft 
animals. The flesh- and the egg-producing qualities of poultry have 
been improved. 

Another very important phase of the work of this bureau is the 
inspection of meat. Step into any butcher shop and you will see 
on the quarters of beef and the bodies of the sheep and hogs offered 
for sale, official marks testifying to the satisfactory condition of the 
meat. The results of the investigations of the various divisions 
of the Department of Agriculture are published in such form as to 
be available and very helpful to farmers, stock-raisers, dairymen, 
poultry keepers, fruit-growers and others. Many of these publica- 
tions can be secured free, and in no case is the charge large. 

Our Forestry Service and our Weather Bureau are other important 
branches of the Department of Agriculture. These are treated in 
other chapters. 

Movement Back to the Soil. — ^Recently there was an evident 
tendency on the part of dwellers in the cities to move into the rural 
sections. We heard considerable of the '*back-to-the-soil " movement. 
The results of the Fourteenth Census are disappointing in that they 
show an increased movement from the country to the (cities. This 



172 Geography 

was the inevitable consequence of war conditions. Foremost among 
the causes which should operate to produce a country ward movement 
is the great improvement in the conditions surrounding farm life. 
In the earlier days the isolation of those who lived on farms was a 
decided objection to country Ufe. 

A few years ago the farmer was obUged to drive to the post 
office for his mail. In many cases the distance was so great that 
the trip would be made only once or twice a week during the busy 



FiQ. 57,— A modern fam house. <U. 3. D. A.) 

season. Rural free delivery now gives the farmer his daily paper, 
and thus he keeps informed. Higher wages on the farms arc making 
it easier to secure and retain farm labor, and the use of the grapho- 
phone is an added attraction. 

Good roadfj have enabled the farmer to market his produce at a 
greater profit than heretofore. In addition, improved road conditions 
have made it possible to useautomobiles, have placed theadvantages 
of the town within easy reach, and have done much to reduce the 
isolation and monotony of hfe upon the farm. 

The telephone is now in use in countless farmhouses, and gas 
and electricity in many. The improvement in schools and the large 
number of farmers' societies play their part in holding the rural 
population. The freedom from the noises, the dust, the anxiety 
and the physical and moral dangers of the city, and the realization 
of the importance of the purer air of the country, are other factors 



The Response of the Soil 173 

tending to bring about a better balance between the distribution 
of rural and urban population. 

Fertilizing the Soil. — The necessity for fertilizing the soil has 
been recognized for centuries. The early settlers in this country 
found that the Indians not only practiced agriculture in a crude 
way, but fertilized the soil as well. Since it was discovered that 
artificial fertilizers could be employed, the nations of western Europe, 
as well as our own, have spent large sums of money annually for them. 



Fm. 58.— A good mral road id Ohio. (V. S. D. A.) 

There are three essential elements of the soil: potash, phosphorus 
and nitrogen. Germany has practically controlled the potash 
supply of the world. Following the opening of the European War 
in 1914, the price advanced, and we had difficulty in securing an 
adequate supply of this material. 

Lai^e deposits of potash exist in southeastern California and in 
Utah, and the seaweed known as kelp along our western coast 
is rich in potash. Experimentation is being carried on in these 
fields, and in the near future they may meet our needs along 
this line. 

Although about 3 per cent, of the crust of the earth is potash, 
only about 1-10 of 1 per cent, is phosphorus. The chief supplies 
of phosphorus now known are located in the United States. For 
years Florida has furnished large quantities. Quite recently great 
deposits were discovered in Wyoming, Idaho and Utah. On a smaller 



174 Geography 

scale there are phosphate beds in Tennessee, Virginia and Pennsyl- 
vania. President Roosevelt withdrew from entry all public lands 
believed to be rich in phosphate. 

Some authorities believe that we are facing a world famine as a 
result of the diminishing supply of this mineral, others take a more 
hopeful. view. Experiments carried on in Illinois showed that in 
the upper seven inches of soil there were 1191 pounds of phosphorus, 
and that a com crop yielding 75 bushels per acre used 17 pounds 
of this. At this rate the Illinois soils would be depleted of phosphorus 
in 70 years. 

Three-fourths of the phosphorus drawn from the soil by plants 
is deposited in the grain of the plant, and the remainder in the stalk 
or straw. It is evident that a large amount of phosphorus could be 
saved annually by plowing under the straw, com fodder and similar 
material, instead of burning it, as is frequently done. 

Nitrogen is one of the three absolutely essential plant foods. 
More than three-fourths of our great atmospheric sea is nitrogen. 
This is jree nitrogen, but that in the soils is in the form of nitrates , 
for example, nitrate of soda. This form is very soluble in water, 
and hence is found in large amounts in arid regions only. Northern 
Chile is a great storehouse of this material, and millions of dollars' 
worth are exported annually. 

A few years ago the wonderful discovery was made that certain 
bacteria, minute plants belonging to the fungi, are able to take free 
nitrogen from the atmosphere and convert it into nitrates. The 
bacteria caused the growth of the tubercles upon the roots of legumi- 
nous plants such as peas, beans, alfalfa and peanuts. In these 
tubercles or nodules the nitrogen compounds are stored, and upon 
decay of the roots, the nitrogen is added to the soil. 

The bacteria were discovered by the German scientist, Herman 
Hellriegel, but it remained for Dr. George F. Moore, of our Depart- 
ment of Agriculture, to work out a method of cultivating them. 
Farmers can now obtain from Washington packages of these useful 
plants. A package about the size of a yeast cake contains millions 
of germs. The bacteria are placed in a barrel of clean water, and the 
seeds of such plants as have been mentioned are soaked in the 
water. This gives to the plants added power to withdraw nitrogen 
from the atmosphere. 

It has been found that a leguminous crop adds on the average 
200 pounds of nitrogen per acre to the soil. Experiments have 
shown that cotton, when following a leguminous crop, increased 



The Response of the Soil 175 

372 pounds per acre, potatoes 34.4 bushels, oats 52.2, and wheat 
12 bushels. 

As nitrogen eventually escapes back to the air, it seems evident 
that without the work of the nitrogen-fixing plants our supply would 
in time be exhausted. When the roots of these plants decay, the 
nitrogen is left in the soil. The decay causes the breaking up of the 
nitrogen compounds and the formation of oitrates. 

Waste products obtained from slaughter-houses, steel and cement 
plants, and the wood and fish industries now supply large quantities 
of fertilizers. 



rhe parU at a plow: a. mold board; b. ihire; c. point: i, «Un: e. handin: /. beam: 
di: k. standard: ', Isndside: ', jointer: k, lausr whed: U bridle: n. beam clevb: n, 



Rotation of Crops. — Different plants require different amounts 
of the various plant foods. Hence repeating any crop year afteryear 
exhausts certain foods, and the soil is said to have lost its fertility. 
The almost exclusive cropping of tobacco in Virginia in colonial days 
exhausted vast tracts of land. As little of the land was occupied, 
the planters kept piacmg new areas under cultivation. 

Following clover by wheat, wheat by com, and corn by potatoes, 
is an example of rotation of crops. In Germany this is extensively 
practiced. From what has been said it can be seen that some legu- 
minous crop should be included in any scheme of crop rotation. 

Althou^ the belief is rather general that our soils are approach- 
ing exhaustion, it is held by some that this is not necessarily the case. 
Recent investigations carried on by the Bureau of Soils seem to 
indicate that under proper management the soil can be made to 
yield increasingly large returns. "It can be said, therefore, that 
the soil is the one indestructible asset of the Nation, which can be 



176 Geography 

vastly improved by better aad intensive methoda, or which can be 
t«nij>orarily impaired by wrong usage. "^ 

Culdvation of the SoiL — I'oday the manufacture of farm tools 
and machinery employs many persons and large amounts of capital. 
The labor-saving devices enable one man to care for many times as 
much land as he could formerly care for. Two acres represents a 
fair day's work for the old-fashioned plow. With a plow consisting 
of 20 "gangs" or individual plows, and drawn by an engine, 30 a^res 



can be plowed in the same time. With the cradle of many years ago 
a man could cut three acres of wheat in a day, A modem harvester 
such as is used in the Pacific Coast States can cut 70 acres per day, 
and in addition thresh the grain and sack it. 

Irrigating Crops. — In most parts of the world we depend upon 
Nature to supply plants with water, but for many years irrigation 
has been practiced in Egypt, India and China. Where Nature does 
the work, there are times when the plant receives too much water, 
and other times when it does not receive enough. Under artificial 
watering this can be regulated. 

The amount of water required to mature a crop depends upon 

'"Report of the Secretary of Agriculture." Yearbook, 1912, p. 161. 



The Response of the Soil 



177 



the character of the soil, the distribution of the water, cultivation, 
rate of evaporation, and the crop itself. For every pound of dry- 
vegetable matter produced, such as straw or com stalks, from 300 
to 400 pounds of water are required. A crop of com yielding 50 
bushels per acre would require about 10 inches of water per acre. 




PRINCIPAL IRRIGATION PROJECTS 

(H TMI WXai-CRN ODITCO «TATI0 

Fig. 61. — Principal irrigation projects in the Western United States. (U. S. Reclamation Service. ) 

As approximately only one-third of the rainfall finds its way into the 
soil, we see that com cannot be successfully grown without irrigation 
in regions having a slight annual precipitation. 

In a wet soil plants develop many roots, but in a dry soil they 

do riot. If the surface only be irrigated, there will be a strong growth 

of the roots in a superficial layer of the soil, and the crop cannot endure 

a drought, for it will not be able to draw upon deeper supplies. As 

12 



The Response op the Soil 179 

plant roots take in oxygen, it is easy to give a crop too much water. 
This cuts off the underground supply of oxygen, and in effect 
smothers the plant. 



Fia. 63.— IrrigBUon cuial nosr'Msm, AriioDa. 

Social conditions in irrigated sections are quite different from 
those that obtain in humid regions. The. development of water 
usually demands cooperation, and cooperation must be practiced 
in its distribution. As crops are more certain, lai^er and more 
frequent (sometimes several in a year) under irrigation than where 
rainfall is depended upon, farms are likely to be small. -A man cannot 
work as large an area, and, owing to the advantage mentioned, the 
land is more valuable than non-irrigated farms. 



180 Geography 

Small holdings mean a relatively dense population. As a natural 
result good roads, rural delivery, telephones, libraries, schools and 
churches come early in the development of irrigated sections. Good 
illustrations are eastern Washington, southern Idaho, Utah, southern 
California, and other parts of our arid West. 

In 1902 our government passed the Reclamation Act, which 
has as its object the transformation of arid lands into homes for 
actual settlers. The first project was opened in 1905. Many millions 
of dollars have been spent, and work has been done in all of the 
states in the semi-arid sections of the United States. Much work 
has been done by companies as well. In 1917 there were about 
17,000,000 acres of irrigated land in our country. Areas which but 
a few years ago were barren wastes are now cut up into fruitful 
farmlands which support thriving towns.. 

STUDIES 

Discuss the statement: Agriculture is the basis of human welfare. Is there 
a "back-to-the-soil" movement in this coimtry? What is the average value 
per acre of agricultural land in your locality? . What are the leading crops? 
Is most of the land tilled by those who own it? What is the condition of the 
roads in your county? Is agriculture taught in the schools? Examine the roots 
of leguminous plants, and see if you can find the nodules spoken of. In what 
parts of the world is irrigation extensively practiced? Contrast the farm life 
of today with that of 25 years ago. Compare farm life in the United States 
with that of China. Give illustrations of the value of co-operation among farmers. 

REFERENCES 

Blanchard, C. J.: **The Spirit of the West." NaJt. Geog, Mag., vol. ii, p. 333. 

(Irrigation and Irrigation Projects.) 
Elliott, Guy Mitchell: "Our Greatest Plant Food." Nai. Geo. Mug., vol. 

xxi., p. 783. (Phosphorus.) 
"inoculating the Ground." Nat. Geog. Mag., vol. xv., p. 225. 
"Japanese Agriculture." Jour, of Geog., vol. ii, p. 304. 
King, F. H. : ''Farmers of Forty Centuries." (Agriculture in China.) 
McMuRRY, Charles A.: ''Conservation as ExempUfied by Irrigation Projects." 

Lessons in Community and National Ldfe. Community Leaflet No. 6., Nov. I, 

1917. 
Rexford, Miller Eric: "Local Climatic Peculiarities in Their Relation to 

Intensive Agriculture." Jour, of Geog., vol. x, p. 195. 
Ross, Wm. H.:" Fertihzers From Industrial Wastes." Yearbook, U. S. Dept. 

of Agri., 1917, p. 253. 
Smythe, William: "The Conquest of Arid America." 
Wilson, James: "The Modem Alchemist." Nat. Geog. Mag., vol. xviii, p. 78. 



CHAPTER XVII 
Plant Life 

General Statement — Wonderful indeed are the works of man. 
So far as transportation is concerned, he has conquered the land, 
the sea, and to a certain extent, the atmosphere. He communicates 
with the most distant parts of the earth practically instantaneously. 
The energy developed from falling water he has harnessed to his 
manufacturing plants; at his will this energy conveys him from 
place to place, or dispels the darkness of night. Man can even pre- 
serve his own voice, so that long after he has passed away people may, 
if they desire, hear the tones in which he read, or spoke, or sang, and 
those who knew him will recognize the voice of the one who has gone. 
Yet with all of his power, man cannot create life, and he does not 
even know definitely what life is. 

Two Divisions of Life. — We recognize two great divisions of life — 
plant and animal; hence we have the science of these two phases 
of life, biology. In many ways plant and animal life are very different, 
and yet there are certain resemblances. Formerly plants were not 
believed to be living organisms, but in the seventeenth century the 
botanist Jung declared them to be such. 

Generally speaking, the power of locomotion distinguishes 
animals from plants, but there are some exceptions. Some animals, 
such as the coral, the starfish, and the oyster (except during the first 
few days of its existence), do not have the power of moving from 
place to place. Although the power of locomotion does not belong 
to plants, many of them have the ability to move, and such plants 
are said to be sensitive. Growers of rice often find in their fields a 
creeping plant called Mimosa. If the leaflets of its compound leaves 
are touched, or even disturbed by vibrations of the atmosphere, 
they will shrink, and the whole leaf will bend. On this account the 
Mimosa is sometimes called the Shame plant, Venus flytrap is 
another sensitive plant. The oxalis or sorrel, the clover and the 
California poppy are examples of plants that fold their leaves at night. 

The Life Cycle of Plants. — The life of a plant may be very brief 
— only a few days, or even hours, or it may, as in the case of the 
Sequoia gigdntia^ those wonderful trees of California, represent 
centuries. In fact, according to our best authorities, some of those 
trees were old at the beginning of the Christian era. 

181 



182 ^ Geography 

Many plants develop from the seed to maturity and ripen their 
seed during one year. When they have, so. far as it is possible for 
them, insured the perpetuation of their kind, their existence ceases. 
Such plants are annuals. Our cereals are examples. Other plants 
require two years for this work, an 1 are therefore called biennials. 
Such are the carrot, parsnip, mullein, foxglove and teasel. Plants 
that persist for a number of years are known as perennials. Our 
common fruit and shade trees are familiar examples. 

Man's Dependence Upon Plants. — ^AU animal life, including that 
of man, depends for its existence upon plants. Animals must have 
organic substances to use as food, but plants manufacture their 
foods from inorganic substances. In other words, the only way in 
which our food supply can be perpetuated or added to is through 
the work of plants. Plants are factories in which the food for all 
life is manufactured. This is the primary relationship between plants 
and man, but there are many other important ones. 

Plants furnish the fibers from which much of our clothing is made. 
Wood enters into the construction and furnishing of most houses. 
We travel from place to place in conveyances made in part of w^ood. 
Our newspapers are made from wood-pulp. Not unimportant is the 
value of plants from the aesthetic point of view. Trees cast a grate- 
ful shade upon the homes of rich and poor, and the forest furnishes 
inspiration to those who visit it. Flowers convey a message of joy 
to the beholder no matter what his race or language. It is therefore 
in the highest degree instructive and interesting to know some of the 
fundamental principles that govern plant Ufe. 

The actual or apparent death of a multitude of plant forms each 
autumn, and the renewal of life each spring, is a phenomenon familiar 
to all. A seed may remain in the ground all winter and not germinate, 
yet with the return of warm weather it bursts into life. This annual 
resurrection of plant life is a most beautiful and a most marvel- 
ous thing. 

"All silently and soft as sleep, 

The snow fell flake on flake. 

Slumber, spent earth, and dream of flowers 

Till spring-time bid you wake. 

Agam the deadened bough shall bend 

With blooms of sweetest breath. 

Oh, miracle of miracles, 

This life .that follows death !"» 

^Aldrich: "Resurgam." 



Plant Life 183 

The temperature best suited to germination and growth varies 
with different plants, but no growth takes place at temperatures 
below that of freezing. Some plants are killed by temperatures even 
above the freezing-point, as, for example, the cotton and the melon. 
The low temperature stimulates the protoplasm to give up water. 
The roots fail to supply the leaves with sufficient water to offset the 
amount lost by transpiration, and therefore they wilt and blacken. 

Water is another essential to plant growth. Water penetra+^^ 
the earth to considerable distances, and, where there is abundance, 
forms a film around each soil particle. This moisture, which is 
known as hygroscopic water, is by the process of osmosis (which is 
the diffusion of liquids through membranes) taken in by the root- 
hairs and distributed to all parts of the plant. The root-hairs, 
although very minute, are made up of cells containing protoplasm 
and cell-sap. The liquid passes from the cells in which the density 
of the sap is less to those in which it is greater. 

As the density of the cell-sap is greater than that of the water, 
the water enters the root-hairs. This lowers the density of the cell- 
sap, and the water therefore passes into the cells above. The continu- 
ation of the process carries the water to the leaves, where the excess 
is thrown off. Water gives the stalks and leaves rigidity and the 
distended condition known as turgor, without which normal growth 
cannot take place. 

From the atmosphere the plant must derive oxygen and carbon 
dioxide gas. These enter the plant through tiny openings, chiefly 
on the under surface of leaves, called stomata, SunUght for green 
plants, and soluble salts obtained from soil water by all plants, are 
other essentials for plant growth. 

How Plants Manufacture Food. — As has been stated, most 
animals possess the power of locomotion, and they therefore search 
for their food. A long train of consequences follows this. The 
senses of sight, hearing, taste, smell and touch are necessary, and are 
highly developed. Plants are ^constantly in co&tact with the sources 
of their food supply, the atmosphere and the soil. The senses are 
therefore (with the exception of the last) not developed. 

From the atmosphere the leaves of plants absorb carbon dioxide 
gas. In the presence of sunshine the chlorophyl, or coloring matter, 
of green plants causes the carbon to unite with the elements of water, 
forming a starch or plant food, which is built into the cells. As a 
part of this process, which is known as the process of photosynthesis, 
oxygen is set free. Plants in a room absorb some of the carbon 



184 Geography 

dioxide gas exhaled by people. They may therefore be said to purify 
the atmosphere of rooms, but this applies to the day only, as during 
the darkness the process of growth is not carried on by green plants. 

Carbon enters into the composition of all plants. In other words, 
all of our grains, vegetables, fruits and berries that we use as food 
are in part made up of carbon which they have taken from the air. 

The essential mineral foods of plants drawn from the soil are 
nitrate, potash, phosphorus, potassium-, calcium, magnesium, sulphur, 
iron and chlorine. The three first named are the most vital. These 
foods are taken in the form of soluble salts by the process of osmosis. 
In order that enough food may be obtained, the plant draws from the 
soil much more water than it can use. The process of eliminating 
the surplus is called transpiration. This moisture adds to that 
which collects upon plants during the formation of dew. In order 
to regulate the process of transpiration, the stomata contract or 
e;cpand as occasion requires. 

Reproduction. — ^That an acorn should produce a giant oak, and 
a flinty kernel of com a com plant, is a wonderful thing. The essen- 
tial element of life, whether in the plant or the anima) , is the cell, which 
is composed of a substance known as protoplasm, or bioplasm (life 
substance), usually in a semi-fluid condition. Under proper stijnuli 
the cells develop into plants or animals. 

When we plant a seed we know that if it grows it will produce 
a plant of the same geniLS as that from which the seed was obtained. 
It will not, however,, always produce a plant of the same variety. 
Thus, by selection, growers develop new varieties. 

For the reproduction of plants by means of seeds. Nature makes 
lavish provision. This is necessary, since many seeds do not mature, 
many are destroyed, and many do not fall where they can germinate. 
Gibson says that it is believed that shepherd ^s purse, a conunon 
weed, produces 12,000 seeds annually, the burdock 40,000, and 
purslane 2,000,000. Unless some checks were imposed, a single 
plant would in a few years take possession of all of a continent where 
climatic conditions favored its growth. 

Plants may be reproduced by budding, and this insures propaga- 
tion true to variety. In this process a leaf-bud, called a scions is 
inserted into a cut between the bark and the wood of another plant 
called the stock. Where grafting, which is a form of budding, is 
practiced, the bud is inserted into a cut in the wood of the stock. 
Budding or grafting is used in propagating most fruits. For example, 
orange trees are secured from orange seeds planted in nurseries, but 
to ensure fruit of the desired variety the young trees are budded 



Plant Life 185 

by means of buds taken from trees of the given variety. If desired, 
several varieties of citrus fruits, or of peaches or apricots, may, by 
budding, be obtained from one tree. This is practiced to some extent 
where the grower has a very small piece of land. 

Dispersal of Plants. — For the dispersal of the plant there are various 
means provided. In some cases the seeds are in a fleshy pulp, which 
birdseat. The seeds are thus widely distributed, and asdigestionof the 
pulp does not injure them, the range of the plants is greatly increased. 

Those who walk along country roads or in fields or woods in the 
autumn frequently find many burs, spines or hooks clinging to 
their clothing. Large numbers of these cling to the hair, fur or wool of 
wild and domesticated animals. These burs and similar attachments 
furnish a very effective means of seed dispersal. Certain plants, such 
as sweet peas, beans, violets, locust and witch hazel, have seed 
pods that explode, and thus scatter their contents for short distances. 

In the case of plants the seeds of which are provided with wings or 
parachutes we have another very interesting means of dispersal. 
Some cone-bearing trees are thus provided, as are the elm, catalpa, 
maple, ash and tulip-tree. Among smaller plants the thistle, milk- 
weed and dandelion are familiar examples. 

Man changes the distribution of plants much more rapidly than 
does Nature. In a single day he can carry seeds or plants farther 
than they could be distributed by natural means in centuries. More 
than this, he easily carries the plants across barriers which Nature 
can never overcome, such as the ocean and very lofty mountains. 

Think of what this has meant in the case of com, a native of 
America; of wheat, probably a native of Palestine; of the potato, 
probably a native of Chile; of rice, a native of India; of cotton, which 
seems to have originated in Arabia or India, and of many other very 
useful plants now widely distributed. No cereals were indigenous 
to Australia, therefore the development of that continent depended in 
no small degree upon the introduction of these useful plants. 

Greatly as man has changed the natural distribution of plants, 
he cannot succeed ii;i getting a plant to grow in regions that are 
entirely unsuited to its growth. Only within certain limits can man 
modify life forms. 

Natural Protection. — In various interesting ways nature protects 
plants. There are striking cases in arid regions. The leaves of the 
eucalyptus hang with their edges toward the sun to reduce transpira- 
tion. The cactus has thick leaves for the storing of water, and is 
armed with spines which ward off the attack of animals. 

At the beginning of a dry OT a cold season many trees drop their 



186 Geography 

leaves. This is a natural and effective means of protecting plants. 
Water in the form of ice is of no use to plants, hence during very cold 
as well as during very dry weather the roots do not furnish a supply 
of water. Under these conditions the planta would suffer the loss 



Fig. 6*.— Desert veneUlion. 

of water through transpiration if they retained their leaves, especially 
large ones. In many cases this loss of water would result in the death 
of the part of the plant above ground. 
STUDIES 

Make a list of the useful plants in your locality. What plants have been 
introduced? What useful plants will not grow in the vicinity? Make a study . 
of dispersal and protection as illustrated by plants in your neighborhood. What 
hxial industries are dependent upon plant life? 

REFERENCES 
Bailet, L. H.: "Botany for Secondary Schools. 1913," (Especially Part II.) 
Coulter, John G.: "Plant Life and Plant Use. 1913." (Especially the Intro- 
duction.) 



CHAPTER XVIIl 
The Cereals 

General Statement — The cultivation of the soil was the chief 
tactor in transforming human beings from wanderers into creatures 
having fixed places of abode. Many centuries ago it was discovered 
that the seeds of certain grasses were very valuable as food. These 
plants were cultivated, and as a result of cultivation they were 
greatly improved. From these grasses have developed our cereals 
of today, the most important of which are wheat, corn, rice, oats, 
barley and rye. ^ 

The grea^t industry of agriculture is .fetrgely concerned with the 
cultivation of the;^e plants. Directly ami indirectly the inhabitants 
of the world depend upon them for a large part of their food supply. 
Their cultivation is closely related to stock-raising, the leather and 
liquor industries, the manufacture of agricultural tools and machi- 
nery, and transportation facilities. 

Com. — The average farm value of the com crop of the United 
States for the years 1907 to 1916, inclusive, was about $1,550,000,000. 
This is much greater than the value of all the gold produced in the 
world during any one of these years. If this money were equally 
divided among the inhabitants of the United States it would, give 
approximately $15.00 per year to each man, woman and childf^The 
average farm value of com per acre for the period mentioned was 
about $16.00. Corn is the most valuable crop grown in our country. 

The com plant, which is a member of the grass family, is native 
to the Western Hemisphere, but through the efforts of man it has 
been widely distributed in both the Old and the New Worlds. It is 
believed by some that com originated in Mexico or Central America. 
At the time of the discovery of our continent by Columbus, the 
Indians used com as a food, and Columbus carried seed from the 
West Indies to Europe. Cartier found corn fields where Montreal 
now stands. The early settlers in various parts of America learned 
from the Indians how to cultivate the crop, and bought large quanti- 
ties of the grain from them. 

For its successful cultivation com requires a greater annual 
rainfall and a higher teflftiperature than does wheat. The summer 
temperatures in the British Isles are too low for the growing of com, 

187 



188 Geography 

although one may occasionally see a com plant in a garden. Across 
the English Channel, in France, corn does well. This furnishes a 
striking illustration of the influence of the ocean upon temperature. 
The absence of a com crop in the British Isles is one reason why so 
few hogs are raised there. Most of the pork consumed in these 
islands is therefore imported. 

The date of the first killing frost is very important as applied 



to the corn crop. For example, the first killing frost of some particu- 
lar autumn may be two weeks or even one month earlier than the 
average date of the same event. This would usually mean a tremen- 
dous loss. 

In this country machinery is very largely used in connection 
with the com crop. On the large farms gang-plows are usu- 
ally employed. The seed is planted by machinery, and the 
cultivating is done by a machine, which the oper&tor rides. On 
some farms the com is husked by means of machines propelled by 
gasoline engines. 

About three-fourths of the com crop of the world is produced in 
the United States. Other important corn-growing countries are 
Argentina, Austria-Hungary, Rumania, Italy, Russia and Egypt. 
Fig. 67 shows the chief corn-growing states in our country. Of these 



The Cereals 



189 



Iowa and Illinois are the most important. Although the states in 
this group produce the bulk of the corn crop, their yield per acre 
is not so high as is that of some of the other states. For the years 
1908 to 1917 inclusive, the average yield per acre in Iowa was 35 
bushels; in Illinois^ 34 bushels; in Maine, 41 bushels; and in New 
Hampshire, 42 bushels. 





Pig. 66. 



/ 



Fig. 67. 



Fig. 66. — World's production of corn. Percentages by countries. 1913-1918 inclusive. 
Fig. 67. — Production of Corn in United States. Percentages by states. 1914-1918 inclusive. 

TABLE 1. 

AvERAQE Yield op Corn Per Acre in the United States by Ten- Year 

Periods. 

Years Bushels 

1870 to 1879 27 

1880 to 1889 24 

1890 to 1899 24 

1900 to 1909 25 

1910 to 1917 . .26 

During the decade ending in 1918 the value of the com crop in 
the United States increased 100 per cent. In 1909 one-fifth of the 
cultivated land in our country was devoted to corn. In 1910 the 
value of the com crop in the various states in the corn belt ranged 
from 35 to 53 per cent, of the value of all crops in the same states. 

On page 5 in the Farmers' Bulletin Number 199 occurs the 
following statement: "It is possible within a few years to double 
the average production of com per acte in the United States, and 
to accomplish it without any increase in work or expense/' 



190 Geography 

The figures quoted above are encouraging, for they show that some 
increase has abeady occurred. More careful selection of seed, 
improved metbpds of cultivation and fertilizing of soil, and more 
scientific rotation of crops will accomplish much. 

Although our com crop is so enormous, only about three per cent, 
of it is exported. It is more profitable to convert the com into beef, 
pork and poultry than it is to market it in its original form, and 
feeding the corn keeps the fertilizer on the farm. The industries 
of hog raising and pork packing are very closely related to that of 
com growing. Hence we find great numbers of hogs kept in the com 
belt, and here are located the great pork-packing centers, Chicago, 
St. Louis, Kansas City and Omaha. About three-fourths of the 
com grown in the com belt is fed to stock. 

Although corn has its greatest value when converted into meat 
and its by-products, it is in itself valuable as a food for human beings. 
It is rich in starch and sugar. Com bread and com cakes are exten- 
sively eaten in this country, in Mexico, and in southem Europe. 
In the manufacture of glucose a large quantity of^com is used. 

Starch, beer, and alcohol are other important products of com. 
The leaves are used to some extent in the manufacture of paper; 
the husks are used in mattresses, and the cobs are made into pipes and 
are used as fuel also. Com stalks are used as a summer and winter 
feed for cattle, and as a fertilizer. The poet spoke truly when he 
said, "No richer gift has Autumn poured from out her lavish horn." 

Wheat — For thousands of years wheat has been cultivated. In 
fact it is believed by some that agriculture began with the cultiva- 
tion of this cereal. A few years ago there was discovered in Palestine 
a wild wheat which botanists think is the ancestor of the cultivated 
forms. This wild wheat resists both drought and smut, and therefore 
it may be possible to derive from it varieties which will be adapted 
to semi-arid regions, and at the same time produce larger crops than 
does the wild plant. 

Wheat is the most valuable of food plants, and of all cereals only 
rice is used by a larger number of people. The latitudinal and alti- 
tudinal range of wheat is great, being cultivated from Alaska and 
Siberia" to the Argentine Republic, and from sea level to altitudes of 
many thousand feet in the tropical zone. It grows in regions where 
long, severe winters occur, and in the winterless valley of Cali- 
fornia. It thrives in moist and in arid sections. The crop reaches 
its greatest perfection, however, where the spring is damp and rather 
cool, and the summer warm and dry. It does not need as high a tern- 



The Cereals 191 

perature as does com; hence the wheat belt in our country lies to 
the north of the com belt. 

The United States ranks foremost among the nations of the world 
as a wheat producer, our crop amounting to about twenty per cent. 
of the world's supply. Other important wheat-growing countries 
are: Russia, France, India, Austria-Hungary, Italy, Geraiany, Ru- 
mania, Argentinaand Canada. With theexception of Russia, France, 
Austria-Hungary and Rumania, all European nations are wheat 
buyers. The United States, Russia, Argentina, Rumania, India, 
Canada and Australia are the chief wheat sellers. 



As Fig. 70 indicates, our chief wheat-growing states are North 
Dakota, Kansas, Minnesota, Nebraska, Washington, South Dakota, 
Illinois, Indiana, Missouri and Ohio, About three-fourths of our 
entire wheat crop is grown in these states. Since 1900 the increase 
in our output has been about 40 per cent. The wheat for 1917, 
if equally distributed, would have given to each person in the United 
States about 6 bushels. 

The chief wheat-producing states are not those that yield the 
largest number of bushela per acre. The average yield in Nevada, 
which is very unimportant as a producer, was for the years 1908 to 
1917 inclusive, 29 bushels per acre. For the same period the yield 
in Montana was 23 bushels, in North Dakota 11 bushels, and in 
Minnesota 14 bushels. For the United States the average yield for 
the same period was 15 busheU. per acre. 

Our vast tracts of level fertile lands; our cheap transportation 



192 Geography 

facilities; our scientific methods of agriculture, and our labor-saving 
devices for handling the grain, make it possible for us to compete 
with Russia for the markets of western Europe. 

Largely through the work of our Department of Agriculture, the 
value of our wheat crop has increased^ enormously. In 1899 the im- 
portation of durum wheat from Russia east of the Sea of Azof began. 
Later it was foimd that a better variety, known as Kubana wheat, 
was grown in the Kirghiz Steppe district of western Siberia. Prac- 
tically all of the durum wheat grown in the United States is of 
this variety. This wheat is quite resistant to drought, smut and 
rust, and will flourish in soils having considerable alkali. Another 
point of advantage is that this wheat contains a high percentage 
of gluten. Its cultivation in the semi-arid regions has been 
wonderfully successful. 

This wheat does best in that portion of our country lying approxi- 
mately between the 95th and the 105th meridians. In the southern 
part of this great belt wheat growing has not until recently been 
successful, owing to lack of rainfall. As the precipitation here is 
somewhat in excess of that in the section of Russia from which the 
durum wheat came, it has produced splendid crops. 

The total cost of the experimental work, which covered a period 
of three or four years, was about $10,000. Our crop of durum wheet 
is now worth many millions of dollars annually, and we are exporting 
large quantities, chiefly to the Mediterranean countries, because 
of its splendid value in the manufacture of macaroni. 

Wheat is classed as winter and spring wheat. Winter wheat is 
sown in the autumn and harvested in the early summer. The snows 
of winter protect it, but a winter with little snow is unfavorable. 
Spring wheat is sown in the spring and harvested in the fall. Wheat 
is also classed as hard and soft. Hard wheat contains much gluten, 
and is of special value in the manufacture of macaroni. Soft wheat 
is rich in starch. 

In the preparation of the ground for the seed, gang-plows are, 
on the larger farms, commonly employed. These turn several furrows 
at once, both horse- and steam-power being used. The soil is usu- 
ally pulverized and harrowed, and the seed sown by machinery. 
After seeding, the ground may be rolled, especially if the farm be 
not very large. 

The harvesting of wheat on a Western ranch is a great sight. 
A machine known as a combined harvester, drawn by twenty or 
thirty head of horses or mules, or by an engine, cuts the grain at the 



The Cereals 



193 



rate of 50 to 70 acrea per day. The machine cuts the grain, threshes 
it and sacks it. The sacks are sewed up by two men riding on the 
machine. The filled sacks are dropped automatically, several in a 
place, and the straw is dropped in piles. 

As summer rains do not occur in the wheat belts of the West, - 
the wheat harvest proceeds for weeks without interruption. The 
sacks of grain are often piled up in the fields, thousands in a pile, 
to await shipment. This method of handling wheat cannot be 
employed in humid regions. 

Handling the annual wheat crop in our country is a great under- 
taking. From the fields of eastern 
Washington and Oregon it goes 
in part to mills at Spokane, which 
derive power from the falls in the 
Spokane River, and in part to 
Portland and Puget Sound ports, 
from which both wheat and flour 
are shipped to the Orient. In 
addition to the countless trains 
that bear the crop from the wheat 
fields of the North Central States 
to the centers of population and 
points of export, the '^Soo'* canals 
are taxed to their utmost during 
the period of open navigation. 

About fifty per cent, of our 
wheat crop is grown in the ten states tributary to the Great Lakes. 
This is a great advantage from the standpoint of transportation. 
For the five years ending in 1910, the average cost per bushel for 
transporting wheat from Chicago to Buffalo by the Great Lakes was 
1.4 cents. In 1918 the average cost per bushel from Chicago to 
New York by way of the Great Lakes and the Erie canal was 12.53 
cents. The cost of all-rail shipment during the same year was 
16.24 cents. 

The per cent, of our total crop exported is decreasing. In 1907 
it amounted to 25 per cent. The average for the five years ending 
with 1913 was 15 per cent. In 1914 we exported 37 per cent, of our 
total crop, and in 1917 about 32 per cent. A large part of what we 
export goes to the densely populated countries of western Europe. 
We export a great deal of flour, the number of barrels in 1914 amount-: 
ing to about 12,000,000. 

13 




Fia. 69. — World's production of wheat, 
1013-1017 inclusive. 



194 



Geography 



Whether or not a country supplies itself with wheat depends 
upon economic conditions. Previous to 1846 the "Corn Laws" of 
Great Britain placed an import duty on wheat. As time passed it 
became evident that it was more economical for the people to engage 
in manufacturing and in commerce than to till the soil. The laws 
were therefore repealed. The British Isles now produce about one- 
third of the wheat consumed by their people. 

On the vast plains of southern Russia, known as the "Black 
Earth" region, are wheat fields second only in extent and quantity 
of wheat produced to those of the United States. Owing to primi- 
tive methods of agriculture, and lack of fertilizer, the yield per acre 

is not large. Odessa, on the Black 
Sea, is the great wheat-exporting 
center of Rusgia. The quantity 
exported is greater than it other- 
wise would be, because the peas- 
ants very commonly use rye, 
which is, of course, cheaper. In 
the basin of the Danube, on the 
plains of Hungary, much wheat 
is produced. 

Minneapolis holds first place 
among the cities of the world as 
a wheat-milling center. It is in 
close proximity to the great wheat 
fields of the Nortnwest, and it has 
abundant power afforded by the 
Falls of St. Anthony. Formerly 
wheat was ground between two stones, the distance between them 
determining how fine the grain was ground. Now the wheat is 
ground between steel or porcelain rollers; as many as six or seven 
sets sometimes being used. After the first grinding, the flour is 
bolted to take out the bran. 

When ready for shipment the flour is put up in sacks or bar- 
rels. In the great centers of population the baking of bread is 
an important industry, and its delivery employs a large number 
of persons. 

The future supply of wheat is a matter of great importance. 
The population of the earth is increasing steadily, and the use of 
wheat is being extended in countries where its consumption has been 
very Limited in the past. China, Japan, and the Philippine Islands 




Fig. 70. — Production of wheat in the United 
States. Percentages by states. 1914-1918 

inclusive. 



The Cereals 195 

are illustrations. In addition to this, the area of unused land is 
decreasing. The introduction of drought-resisting varieties, the 
extension of irrigation, and the development of scientific agriculture 
generally, will do much toward solving the problem. 



Fio. 71.— Loading wheat »t Melbourne. Victoria. (Courle»y F. T. A. Fricke. Gov't Repre- 

TABLE 2. 

AvERAQE Yield of Wheat Per Ache in the United States by Ten- Year 
Periods. 

Yean Buiheli 
1870-1879 12 



1900-1909 . 
1910-1918 . 



In this connection it is instructive to compare the average yield 
in our country with that in some others. 



196 Geography 

TABLE 3. 

Average Yield of Wheat Per Acre, 1906-1914 Inclusivip * 

European Russia 10 bu. (1905-1913) 

United States 15 bu. 

Hungary 18 bu. 

Austria 20 bu. (1905-1913) 

France 20 bu. 

Germany 31 bu. 

I United Kingdom 33 bu. 

There appears to be no reason why the yield in the United States 
icannot be made to equal that of Germany or the United Kingdom. 
If, without adding an acre to the area devoted to wheat growing, 
we could increase the yield from 15 bushels per acre to 20 bushels per 
acre, weshould add more than 270,000,000 bushels to the annual crop. 

Oats. — Oats has a wide distribution. It does well in a cooler 
and more moist climate than that best adapted to the growing of 
wheat. The great oats-producing countries of the world are: the 
United States, Russia, Germany, Canada, France, Austria-Hungary 
and the United Kingdom. 

As a producer of oats, the United States holds first place, our 
yield being about one-third of the world's crop. In 1918 the crop 
in the United States amounted to 1,538,359;000 bushels. This was 
the record crop for our country, and was about 26,(X)0,000 bushels 
above the average for the five preceding years. The total farm value 
tof the crop in 1918 was $1,000,(K)0,000, or nearly double the average 
value. In 1909 the area devoted to oats in the United States was 
7 per cent, of the total area cultivated. The average yield per acre 
in the most important oats-producing countries is indicated below. 

TABLE 4. 
Yield in Bushels Per Acre, 1905-1914 Inclusive.* 

Country Bushels 

European Russia 21 (1904-1913) 

United States 29 

France 31 

Hungary .32 

Austria .33 (1904-1913) 

United Kingdom 44 

Germany 54 

^ Yearbook, U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, 1915, p. 420. 
^Yearbook, U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, 1915, p. 431. 



The Cereals 



197 



These figures indicate that we can greatly increase the yield of oats 
in this country without increase in the acreage devoted to the crop. 

Fig. 73 shows the oats belt in the United States. For the five-year 
period ending in 1917 the following were the leading states in the 
production of oats: Iowa, Illinois, Minnesota, Wisconsin, Ohio, 
Nebraska, South Dakota. Iowa and Illinois produce about as much 
as the remaining five states in the belt. 

Owing to its bulk, and to the fact that it is chiefly used as a feed 
for horses and mules, oats does not enter in a large way into the 
commerce of the world. We export some, chiefly to the British Isles, 
France and Belgium. 




Fig. 72 



Fig. 73 



Fig. 72.' — World's production of oats. Percentages by countries. 1913-1917 inclusive. 
Fig. 73. — ^Production of oats in the United States. Percentages by states. 1914-1918 inclusive. 

The people of Scotland use large quantities of oatmeal, owing, 
in part at least, to the fact that oats flourish in the cool, moist 
climate of Scotland. The use of oatmeal is increasing in the 
United States. 

Rye. — Rye will flourish at a lower temperature and in weaker 
soils than will wheat, and therefore it is cultivated in high latitudes 
and high altitudes. In Russia much of this cereal is grown far to 
the north of the "Black Earth" zone; and in Norway, owing to the 
moderating influence of the ocean, it Is cultivated as far north as 
the Arctic Circle. Rye is extensively produced on the weak, sandy 
soils of northeastern Germany. 

Russia far outranks all other countries in the production of rye. 
Indeed, it produces nearly as much of this cereal as do all other 



198 Geography 

countries combined. Germany ranks second, and Austria-Hungary, 
France and the United States are large producers. 

TABLE 5. 
Average Yield of Rye per Acre for the Years 1905-1914 Inclusive.' 

Country Bushels per acre 

European Russia 12 (1904-1913) 

United States 16 

France 17 

Hungary 18 

Germany 27 

Ireland 29 

'" / I \ % 

I 

FiQ. 74. — Chief rye-producing states. Fio. 75. — Chief barley-producing states. 

Our chief rye-growing states are Wisconsin, Minnesota, Pennsyl- 
vania, Michigan, New York and New Jersey. These six states 
produce a very large part of our total yield. 

In Europe rye is the poor man's breadstuff, constituting the 
chief food of a considerable part of the population. From it is made 
the "black bread" so largely used by the laboring classes in Russia, 
Germany, Scandinavia, and Austria. In the United States rye was 
formerly chiefly used in the distilling of whiskey. In Holland it 
is used in the manufacture of gin, and in Russia, until recent years, 
in the manufacture of vodka. 

The straw of rye, being long and tough, is used in making straw 
hats, and to some extent it enters into the manufacture of ropes and 
mats. In some parts of Europe houses are thatched with this straw. 

'Yearbook U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, 1915, p. 446. 




The Cereals 199 

Barley. — Barley is the most widely distributed of the cereals. 
It matures in Norway north of the Arctic Circle, and in Liberia with- 
in ten degrees of the equator. It ripens where the growing period 
is shorter and the average summer temperature lower than they are 
in the regions adapted to other grains. Russia is by far the most 
important barley-producing country in the world. The United 
States, Austria-Hungary, Germany, Spain, Japan and Algeria grow 
large quantities. 

Fig. 75 shows the chief barley-growing states in our country. 
For the years 1912 to 1917, inclusive, Minnesota, California and 
North Dakota produced about one-half of our total crop of barley. 

As wheat commands, a higher price than does barley, the latter 
is extensively used in bread-making in Russia, Germany and Norway. 
In Norwajr, what is know as "flat bread'* is made from this cereal. 
The dough is rolled into large thin sheets and then spread upon a flat 
stone or ypn pUti^, under which there is a fire. After baking, the 
bread is stored in a dry place for winter use. Pearl barley is used 
in making soupiS and gruels. 

. TABLE 6. 
Yield op Barley per Acre, 1905 to 1914 Inclusive.* 

Country Bushels 

European Russia 15 (1904-1913) 

Hungary 25 

France 24 

United States 25 

Austria 27 (1904-1913) 

United Kingdom 35 

Germany 37 

Rice. — ^This cereal has been cultivated for thousands of years- 
It is said to be indigenous to India, and to have been introduced 
into China 3000 years before the beginning of our Christian efa and 
into America in 1694. Although rice contains more starch than any 
other cereal, it is, as compared with wheat, deficient in nourishing 
qualities, but it is agreeable to the taste, easily digested, and a grain 
that is especially adapted to many of the densely populated portions 
of the Orient. Rice is therefore the staple food of abqut one-third 
of the inhabitants of the globe. It is not a very important article 
of commerce, as it is largely consumed in the countries where it is 
grown. We grow about one-half the quantity consumed in our coun- 
try, importing the remainder from Asia. 

— ^ — — — -^ _ __ lU 

*yearbook^ U. S. Department of Aj^iculture^ 1915^ p. 439- 



200 Geogkaphy 

Although there are many varieties of rice, there are two kinds 
of most importance: swamp and upland rice. ' The first-named 
variety is grown upon the fertile lowlands that can easily be irrigated, 
such as the deltas of the Hoang-ho, Menam, Po and Mississippi. 
Upland rice is grown upon land that is not irrigated. 

In the United States rice is sown in the fields, sometimes by 
machinery and sometimes by hand, but in the Hawaiian Islands, 
the Philippines, Japan and some other regions the swamp rice is 
sown in nursery beds and transplanted by hand, the work being done 



Fio. re.— Plowiiic a rice Reld in the Philippines. 

when the fields are covered with water. The fields are flooded at 
intervals until the grain blossoms. The water is then drawn off 
in order that the grain may ripen more rapidly, as well as to allow 
the ground to dry preparatory to harvesting the crop. 

WTiile lowland rice is grown on deltas near sea level, salt water 
is injurious to the crop. So also is flood water, because its temper- 
ature is lower than that of the water used in irrigation. The fields 
are therefore protected by means of levees. 

In the Orient, rice is cut by hand, and this method of harvesting 
was, until recently, employed in our country, because the moist 
condition of the soil makes it difficult to use machinery. Harvesters 
having wheels with wide tires are now in use on the large plantations 
in Texas and Louisiana. This has stimulated rice-growing in the 
United States. 

The first operation after harvesting is the threshing of the crop. 
The paddy, which is the name given to the grain before the hulls 
are removed from the kernels, is then put through the hulling ma- 



The Cereals 201 

■ 

chine. The grain is next screened to separate the whole kernels 
from the chaff and broken bits. This refuse is made use of as a pack- 
ing material, and in some cases it serves as fuel in factories. 

Polishing the kernels is the next operation. This gives them a 
white appearance, which increases the selling price but decreases the 
value of the grain, for it removes some of the nutriment. The rice 
flour that results from the polishing is said to be 1% times as valuable 
as a food as is polished rice. 

From one to three bushels of rice are sown to the acre, and about 
thirty bushels per acre constitutes an average crop in the United 
States. The cost of producing the crop, including interest on the 
money invested, is ttbout $25.00 per acre. The following table i? 
taken from Farmers' Bulletin No. 110, p. 19: 

TABLE 7. 

NuMBEB OF Acres One Man Can Farm in Rice, With Wages in Different 

Countries. 

Farm wages in gold per 
Countries Acres year, with board 

Japan ii $10.00 to $18.00 

China H-2J^ $ 8.00 '* $12.00 

Philippines • 2J^ ... .$15.00 " $20.00 

India 3 $10.00 '' $20.00 

Siam .3 $10.00 " $20.00 

Egypt 4 $15.00 " $30.00 

Italy 5 $40.00 " $60.00 

Spain 5 $40.00 " $60.00 

United States 8-80 .... (estimated) $300.00 " 500.00 

This table shows that although the wages paid in this country 
are far in excess of those paid in the Orient, our rice is produced 
more cheaply than is rice in the East. This is because of the use 
of machinery in the United States. The area in our Southern States 
well adapted to rice-growing is only in part utilized, and our output 
can be very greatly increased. Rice is now being successfully grown 
in California, 80,000 acres being devoted to the crop in 1917, and the 
area can be very greatly increased. "There is no satisfactory reason 
why the United States should not grow and mill all of its own rice, 
and become an exporter."^ 

Bice-growing is very profitable on the lowlands near Valencia, 
Spain. It is reported that in that locality good rice land sells at from 

^ Farmers' Bulletin No. 110, p. 28. 



202 Gbographt 

$700 to $1,000 per acre. In British Burmah and in Lower Bei^al 
from 80 to 90 per cent, of the cultivated land is in rice. 

The great rice-growing countries are: India, China, Japan, Java, 
Siam and Korea. Many other areas produce considefabie quantities. 
Rice requires a high temperature, a growing season of 135 days, an 
abundance of water, and a relatively impervious underlying soil. 
Its distribution is therefore limited. Its extreme latitudinal boun- 
daries are approximately 45° north and 30° south of the equator, 
and its temperature limits are rougiily indicated by the annual 
isotherms of 60° F. 



Pia. 77.— A rice Geld in United SluUe. 

Fig. 79 shows the states that constitute the rice belt in our 
country. Of these Louisiana, Texas and Arkansas rank in the order 
named. In 1915 Louisiana produced nearly one-half of our total crop. 

TABLE 8. 

AvBRAOB Anndal Yield of Rice for the Five- Year Period Ending With 

1913.* 

Country Pounds 

British India 73,544,265,000 

China 47,204,000,000 (eatimated) 

Japan 10,562,400,000 

Java aDd Madura 7,591,090,000 

Saja 4,658,151,000 

Korea 2,480,046,000 

United States 681,166,000 

World (1908-1912) - 169,585,133,000 

'From Yearbooks, U. S. Dept. Agriculture. 



The Cereals 



203 



Rice is of the greatest economic importance in many Oriental 
countries. In addition to its use as a food, the people of Japan use 
the straw in making mats, ropes, bags, hats, raincoats, sandals and 
a thatch for houses. From the grain they make a popular liquor 
called saki. In the Philippines rice is the principal article of food, 
and'until the cultivation of sugar and hemp was shown to be more 
profitable, the cultivation of rice was the chief industry of the people. 
It was formerly an export, but is now an import. The amount 
imported during the year ending June 30, 1916, was about 400,000,000 




Fia. 78 



Fia. 79 



Fia. 78. — World's production of rice. PercentsgeB by countries. 1012-1016 inclusive. 
Fxo. 79. — Production of rice in the United States. Percentages by states. 1914-1918 inclusive. 

pounds, the value of which was roughly $6,000,000. In addition 
to vhe more profitable cultivation of hemp and sugar mentioned 
above, the increased importation of rice has been made necessary 
by the death of large numbers of carabao, due to the rinderpest. 
The work of locusts and the prevalence of cholera have aided in 
decreasing the yield. 

Buckwheat. — Because the seeds of buckwheat resemble those of 
other grainS; it is generally classed as a cereal, although it belongs 
to the dock family. The seed, which is black, resembles somewhat 
in its triangular shape that of the beechnut. It was probably on 
this account that the Germans gave it the name of buchweizen 
(beechwheat). 

For centuries buckwheat has been grown in central Asia, around 
the Caspian Sea, and in the basin of the Volga. By some it is believed 
that it was taken into Europe and Asia by the Tartars. The fact 



204 Geography 

that buckwheat requires a relatively short growing season is taken 
advantage of in southeastern Europe, where the land is often planted 
to this crop after an earlier one has been harvested. Since it can 
be sown very late and yet ripen before danger of frost, it is adapted 
to upland regions and to those of high latitudes. 

In the United States 1,000,000 acres were sown to buckwheat 
in 1918. More than one-half of the total acreage was in three states, 
namely, Pennsylvania, New York and Michigan, and more than 
three-fourths of the total yield was obtained from the same source. 
Russia, France and Japan grow large amounts of buckwheat. 

Buckwheat is fed to horses, cattle and poultry. In some parts 
of the United States it is sown solely for the benefit of honey-bees. 
Buckwheat honey is rich but dark in color. To some extent the 
grain enters into the manufacture of bread, and in the United States 
buckwheat griddle cakes are very popular, especially during the 
winter. As buckwheat contains about 10 per cent, of gluten and 
52 per cent, of starch, it is quite valuable as a food. 

STUDIES 

Is corn an important crop in your state? What is the average yield per acre? 
How many barrels of flour could have been made from the wheat grown in your 
state last year? For how long will the United States continue to be a wheat- 
exporting nation? What inventions have been of great value to the corn and 
wheat grower? In what countries is rice the staple food? Do we need to conserve 
wheat in times of peace? 

REFERENCES 

Finch, V. C, and Baker, O. E.; "Geography of the World's Agriculture." 

U. S, Department of AgricuLturej 1917. 
Harrison, Leslie: "The Culture of Rice in the United States." Jour, oj Geog., 

vol. ii, p. 369. 
Hartley, C. P.: U. S. Department of Agriculture, Farmer^^ BvUetin No. 199 

(Com). 
Humphrey, Harry B.: "Cereal Diseases and the National Food Supply." 

Yearbook, U. S. Dept. of AgH., 1917, p. 481. 
"Russia's Surplus of Wheat." Nai. Geog. Mag., vol. xvii, p. 580. 
Woods, Charles D.: U. S. Department of Agriculture, Farmers' BvUetin 

No. 298 (Com). 
Stinb, O. H.: "The World's Supply of Wheat." Yearbook, U, S. Dept. of Agn., 

1917, p. 461. 
Yearbooks, U. S. Department of Agriculture. 



CHAPTER XIX 
The Fibee Plants 



/ 



COTTON 

Description. — How early man began to use the fiber of the cotton 
plant is not known, but it is mentioned by Herodotus, 445 b.c. 
Cotton generally grows to a height of from two to four feet. There 
are in our country two main varieties, the "upland" and the "sea 
island/' The former, as the name indicates, is grown on the relatively 
high land, while the latter is 
grown on islands and close to the 
coast, chiefly between the latitudes 
of Savannah and Charleston. 

Each plant produces many 
bolls, and when these open the 
cotton is gathered. Picking is 
generally done by hand, although 
picking machines are used. 

The fiber of the sea-island 
cotton is about two inches in 
length. This leads to its use in 
the making of thread, lace and 
fine cambrics. The Egyptian cot- 
ton, having a long staple, is im- 
ported by the United States to 
some extent. This cotton is being grown under irrigation in south- 
eastern California and in the Salt River valley of Arizona. If this 
can be done on a large scale, it will mean much to this section of 
our country, and may lead to the manufacture of cotton goods 
on the Pacific Coast. Upland cotton has a short staple. It is used 
extensively in the manufacture of ordinary cotton goods. 

Distribution. — Of the world's output of cotton more than one- 
half is grown within the United States. In 1918 our country produced 
about 11,000,000 bales, valued at approximately $1,500,000,000. 
This abnormal value was due to war demands. Texas, Georgia, 
Mississippi, Alabama, the Carolinas and Arkansas are the great 
cotton states. The deep, rich soils of the cotton belt are the result 
of the disintegration of the underlying limestone rock. In this belt 
the negro population is, of course, very large. 

205 




Fig. 80. — World's production of cotton. Per- 
centages by countries. 1914-1917 inclusive. 



206 



Geography 



TABLE 9. 
Average Annual Yield op Cotton, 1909-1913 Inclusive.' 

Countries Bales (round numbers) Rank 

United States 13,000,000 1 

British India 3,500,000 2 

Egypt 1,445,000 3 

China 1,200,000 (estimated) 4 

Russia (Asiatic) 639,000 5 

Brazil . 271,000 6 

World 22,250,000 

In the United States the average yield per acre for the decade 
ending in 1915 was 186 pounds, and the average farm value was 

11 cents per pound. In 1910 the 
average yield was but 170 pounds 
per acre, but in 1914 it rose 
to 209, which is the highest on 
record. 

Cultivation and Preparation. — 
Planting in the United States oc- 
curs from the middle of March to 
the middle of May, and harvest 
begins about September first. 

Ginning the cotton, or sepa- 
rating the seeds from the fiber, 
was, until the invention of the 
cotton gin by Eli Whitney in 
1793, a very slow process. This 
work furnished employment to 
large numbers of colored people. It is said that an average work- 
man would gin only about one pound of fiber per day. Whitney's 
invention, therefore, revolutionized the cotton industry. 

Gins differ somewhat. In some, steel discs having notched edges 
catch the fibers and pull them away from the seed. The fiber is 
then blown through tubes to a press, where it is baled. In the United 
States the average weight of a bale is about 500 pounds. 

Shipment — From the fields the bulk of our cotton crop goes 
to seaports to be shipped to New England or Great Britain. The 
larger part of that which goes to Great Britain is manufactured in 
the Manchester district. Liverpool and Manchester regulate the 




Fio. 81. — Production of cotton in the United 
States. Percentages by states. 1914-1918 in- 
clusive. 



^"Yearbooks, U. S. Dept. of Agriculture." 



The FiBBB Plants 207 

price paid for raw cotton. We also export considerable cotton to 
Bremen, Havre, Genoa and Trieste. 

Galveston receives the crop of Texas, and the crop is earUer than 
that in the other states. The Mississippi is the natural channel down 
which a large part of the crop in its baain finds its way to New Or- 
leans. On the southeastern coast, Savannah and Charleston are 
the chief cotton ports. The cost of transporting cotton from the 
fields of the South to the seaports averages 56 cents per hundred 



pounds, and from the seaports to the markets in the United King- 
dom 32 cents per hundred. Thus at a cost of less than one cent per 
pound American cotton is delivered to the great cotton mills in 
the British Isles. 

Manufactuiii^ Centers. — New England has always been the 
center of the cotton manufacturing industry in our country. She 
has the natural advantages of good harbors, abundant water-power 
and proximity to coal fields. A cotton mill was established at Beverly, 
Massachusetts, in 1787, one at Providence, Rhode Island, the next 
year, and one at Pawtucket in 1790. Lawrence, Lowell, Manchester 
and Nashua, cotton manufacturing centers, are situated on the 



208 Geography 

Merrimac. In Maine we have Lewiaton on the ADdroscoggin ; on 
the Kennebec, Augusta and Waterville, and on the Saco, Biddeford. 
Fall River and Woonsocket are two of a group of cotton centers 
at the head of Naragansett Bay. 

The marvelous development of the South is threatening in time 
to wrest from New England the great industry of cotton manufac- 
turing. Already the South has a larger number of mills than has 
New England, but their output is not so great. In the South are 



Pia. S3.~CottoD awuting sbipmeat. 

coai, water-power, the raw cotton, and the advantages of a short 
haul. All along the Fall Line are cities where, owing to the presence 
of power, manufacturing is developing rapidly. Such are Macon, 
Columbia and Raleigh. Long experience and the resulting skilled 
labor are in a measure lacking, but this will be remedied in time, for 
skilled workmen are going into the South, and education is preparing 
them at home. 

The establishment and the operation of mills in the cotton belt 
means great changes in other economic lines. It means the expendi- 
ture of lai^e sums of money, the employment of various kinds of 
labor, and the development of many other industries. 

At the mill the cotton bales are opened by machinery and the 
fibers pulled apart. After the dirt and leaves have been removed 



The Fiber Plants 209 

the cotton is "carded" by being passed between roUera having steel 
points which arrange the fibers so that they lie parallel. After the 
fibers have been loosely twisted and wound on spools a "mule jenny" 
spins it into thread or yam. The yam is then, by means of power 
looms, converted into cloth such as cheese-cloth, muslin, duck, 
cambric and other kinds. By printing designs upon them, plain 
cotton goods are changed into calicoes. 

Practically every part of the cotton plant is utilized. The seeds 
on being pressed yield from 15 to 20 per cent, of oil. By adding a 



little caustic acid to the oil it is purified so that it can be used in 
cooking. It is used extensively as an adulterant for olive oil, and in 
the making of soap and candles. 

The material left when the oil has been pressed out is in the form 
of sheets called oil-cake. This, when ground up, makes good cattle 
feed. The hulls and the stalks of the cotton plant are used in the 
manufacture of paper and as fuel. 

Like other crops, the cotton has its enemies. Tremendous loss 
has resulted from the work of an insect called the boll weevil. The 
e^s are laid in the bolls, and the !arvi£ eat and destroy the cotton. 
As a result of experimentation carried on by our Department of 
Agriculture, it has been found that by burning the plants in the fall 
and planting the seeds early in the season much loss can be avoided. 
The burning of the plants destroys untold numbers of the insects. 
The farm on which the experimental work was done yielded about 



210 Geography 

three times as much cotton per acre as did a check-farm (a farm 
where the experlmeDtal work was not done) several miles distant, 
although the soil on the check-fann was more fertile. This work 
resulted in a gain of about $20.00 per acre. 

Improved machinery and methods have greatly lessened the cost 
of cotton goods, and brought about a consequent increase in their 



use. We now sell large quantities of cotton cloth to China. Most 
of it goes to Shanghai, from which point it is distributed to various 
parts of the populous Yangtee valley. 



Histoiy. — It seems almost like the work of magic to convert 
the fiber of a simple little plant into beautiful wearing apparel, or 
into costly laces. The F>eriod of human progress must have been 
measured by many centuries before this was realized, yet flax was 
used by the Babylonians, Chaldeans, Phcenicians and Egyptians 
thousands of years ago. During the Stone Age of Europe the Swiss 
. Lake Dwellers manufactured linen cloth. 

Flax is believed to have originated between the Caspian Sea and 



The Fiber Plants 



211 



the Persian Gulf, but a knowledge of its value gave it a wide range. 
In 1630 it was introduced into Massachusetts, and during colonial 
days the raising of flax and the manufacture of linen were industries 
in which nearly all rural families participated. The invention of 
the cotton gin in 1793 made possible the manufacture of cotton cloth 
at so low a price that the linen industry at once declined. 

Description. — There are many varieties of flax, but the Linum 
tisitatissimum, or "most useful flax, " is the one commonly cultivated. 
The plant is an annual, reaching a height of two or three feet, and 
having a blue blossom. It is raised both for its seed and its fiber. 




Distribution— While flax has a wide range, being found from the 
10th to the 65th parallels of north latitude, it flourishes best where 
there are rather mild temperature conditions and an abundance 
of moisture. About one hundred days free from frost are required 
for the maturing of the crop. In the region aboiit Green Bay, Wis- 
consin, where flax is successfully grown, the average temperature 
during the growing period is 54° F. At Belfast it is 52° F., and at 
Brussels 59° F. For the same period the humidity at Green Bay is 
72 per cent., atBelfastabout 85percent.,and at Brussels 77 per cent. 
In Russia, where the crop has been cultivated for a long time, it has 
become adapted through selection to the short summers of the north 
and the dry climate of the south. 

The crop has never been a permanent one in our country, but 
has been constantly shifted to new areas. It has been believed that 
flax quickly exhausted the soil. Recent studies seem to show that 
the difficulty is due to a fungus growth. This can be overcome by 
careful selection and treatment of seed. 



212 GEOGRA.PHY 

TABLE 10. 
Average Animal Production of Flax Fiber, 1910-1912 Inclusivb.^ 

Country Pounds (round numbers) Rank 

Ruasia (European) 866,577,000 1 

Belgium 55,333,000 2 

Austria 49,456,000 3 

France 41,398,000 4 

Ireland 24,728,000 5 

Netherlands 18,778,000 6 

TABLE n. 
Average Annual Production op Flax Seed, 1912-1914 Inclusive.' 

Country ' Bushels (round numbers) Rank 

Argentina 35,000,000 1 

Russia (European) 23,299,000 2 

India 20,898,000 3 

United States 19,891,000 4 

Canada 16,948,000 5 

Flax requires a well-drained but not a particularly fertile soil. 
If there be too much clay the straw is long, but does not yield the 
best quality of fiber. A large part of the world 's supply of flax comes 
from Russia, but Belgium produces the best fiber. Ireland, Holland, 
Austria, Hungary, Italy, France, Canada and the United States and 
Argentina are other flax-growing countries. The Dakotas, Montana 
and Minnesota produce practically all of the flax grown in our country. 
In southern Russia, India, Argentina and the United States the 
plant is cultivated almost entirely for its seed. The yield of seed 
in the United States increased from 562,000 bushels in 1849 to 
29,285,000 bushels in 1902. In 1916 the yield was 14,000,000 bushels. 
Near Yale, Michigan, Northfield and Huron Lake, Minnesota, 
Salem, Oregon, and in the Puget Sound country, some fiber is pro- 
duced. The yield of seed in Canada has increased very greatly, 
Saskatchewan being the chief producing area. 

Cultivation. — In preparing the ground for flax, deep ploughing 
and thorough pulverizing are very essential. The seed are sown 
broadcast. Successive crops of flax cannot profitably be grown upon 
the same land. In some countries the same fields are planted but 
once in eight or ten years. 

Weeds are the bane of a flax-grower. It is necessary carefully to 



^"Yearbook U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, 1913," pp. 432, 433. 
Yearbook U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, 1916, " pp. 479, 480. 



3« 



The Fiber Plants 213 

weed the crop, and as this must be done by hand it adds much to 
the cost of production. The weeding takes place when the plants 
are one to two inches in height. 

When the leaves are just beginning to turn yellow, and the seed is 
in the dough, the flax is liarvested by being pulled by hand. If the 
crop were cut, the escape of moisture from the stems would discolor 
the straw. The flax is next set up in tittle bundles to dry, after 
which it is ri-ppted. 

If the seeds are to be saved, the bundles are, after having been 
cured, held heads foremost against rollers of corrugated iron by means 
of which the seed-pods are crushed. The leaves and seed are separated 
by a fanning mill, and the straw is then stacked. 



Fio. 87. — Flai hackles. Dressed or hackled flai is prcpsred by drawing the scutched fiber 
™t over e coarse ac e, t en ^over^t^ e^^^ner^onw. jOoni^ing on s ives an coarse so 

Retting is a partial decay of the outer part of the stem. This 
process may take place on the ground where the plant is exposed 
to the dews and rains, or in ponds, streams or tanks. The quality 
of the linen depends, in large measure, upon the retting of the flax. 
Although dew-retting produces the most unsatisfactory results, it is 
the process most commonly employed in our country. In Ireland 
pond-retting is generally practiced, while in Belgium, where the best 
fiber is produced, stream-retting is employed. 

The Courtrai flax, which takes its name from a town in western 
Belgium, is of a light, creamy color, and possesses great tensile 
strength. This celebrated flax is retted in the river Lys, a sluggish 
stream believed to possess peculiar properties for this work. The 
buudles of Sax are placed on end in crates about twelve feet square 



214 Geography 

and three feet high. These crates are tight on the bottom, but are 
open on the sides. Before loading the crates, canvas is spread on 
the bottom and allowed to cover the sides. When the loaded crate 
is submerged in the stream the canvas keeps out the dirt. The flax 
remains in the stream from four to fifteen days, according to the 
temperature of the air and water. It is then spread upon the ground 
to dry, after which it is immersed for a second period about equal 
to. the first. 

Tank-retting avoids the pollution of the waters of the streams. 
The tanks used are made of brick or wood, the bundles of flax being 
placed in them endwise. Water enters through an intake, and is 
carried off at just the right moment. 

The woody fiber of the flax is loosened by a process called breaking j 
after which all waste material is removed by scutching. The fiber 
is now hackled or combed. This straightens the twisted fibers and 
takes out the broken ones. 

Manufacture. — Belfast has long been known for its manufacture 
of fine linens and laces. Lille, France, is also very important in this 
line. There are three natural causes for this: the nearness of the 
raw material, the proximity of the coal fields, and the short distance 
of the city from the river Lys, to which the peasants carry their flax 
to be retted. * 

Products. — From flax fiber linen carpet-yams, linen thread for 
shoe-making, twines, toweling, cables, linens and laces are made. 
The finest of paper is made from linen rags, while flax seed is used in 
making oil-cake aiid linseed oil, the latter being employed in the 
manufacture of paints. 

It is seen from this that several industries center about flax- 
producing areas. In the United States we have at least two mills 
for the manufacture of binder-twine from the fiber — one in Min- 
nesota and one in Michigan. We have some forty mills for the 
crushing of the seed, the most important located at Buffalo, Minne- 
apolis, New York and Chicago. Most of the oil is used at home, 
but we export considerable oil cake to Europe. Vast quantities of 
straw, which might be used for fiber, are burned yearly in our country. 
Our Bureau of Plant Industry is making exhaustive studies, hoping 
to be able to develop the culture of flax as a permanent and profitable 
feature of our agriculture. 

In 1918 the average price of flax seed per bushel in the United 
States was $3.40. The average yield per acre for the same period 
was 8 bushels. 



The Fibkh Plants 215 

HEMP 

Histotj. — Hemp was probably the first plant cultivated for fiber. 
It is believed that its original home wa^ China. Accordii^ to an 
ancient Chinese record, the plant was in use as early as the 28th 
century B.C. Hemp found its way into Europe many centuries 



before the beginning of the Christian era, and it was carried to New 
England soon after the first settlement was established. 

Description.^ — The hemp plant is an annual,- growing from five 
to fifteen feet in height, and with stems about as thick as a man 's 
finger. The leaves are of a rich, dark green color. The fiber is long, 
soft and strong, but as it cannot be bleached white it is not used 
in the manufacture of fine fabrics. 

Cultivation,— Hemp thrives on fertile soils like those of bottom 
lands. It requires from 80 to 100 days for its maturing. Hemp does 
best in a rather humid climate, and it requires four months free from 



216 Geography 

frost. A temperature varying from 60°-80° F. is the most desirable. 
In Kentucky much of the crop is pulled by hand, but in the Western 
States most of the work is done by machinery. A good workman 
may cut one-half acre per day, while with a machine from five to 
ten acres can be cut daily. 

After cutting, the unbound bundles are left on the ground for 
some time to dry. Finally they are placed in the stack, where they 
are allowed to remain for two or three years. This is said to improve 
the quality of the fiber and to make the breaking and cleaning easier. 
The great desire of the grower is to obtain a uniform stand of stalks, 
for unless this can be done a good yield of fiber cannot be expected. 

Distribution. — Russia produces more hemp than all other coun- 
tries of the world combined. She manufactures large quantities, 
and exports some raw material. Hemp thrives in Italy, France, 
Hungary, Germany, Algeria and in the warrner parts of Asia. In our 
country, Kentucky, Illinois, Nebraska, Texas and California produce 
considerable fiber. In nine counties of the famous *^Blue Grass" 
region of Kentucky more than three-fourths of the American product 
is grown. 

Like flax, hemp must be retted. This is done in a variety of 
ways. In Kentucky the stalks are placed upon the ground in Novem- 
ber and allowed to remain until the vegetable gums that surround 
the fiber have been destroyed. After retting, the stalks are handled 
by the breaker. This work is sometimes done by hand, and some- 
times by machinery. 

Uses. — Hemp is used in making sackcloth, binder-twine, seine 
twine, homespun, threads and yarns for carpets, and towels. The 
refuse fiber is combed from the tow and used as oakum in calking 
vessels. The oil pressed from the seeds is used in making soap and 
paint. About 1,000 pounds of rough fiber are produced from an acre 
of ground. The price which the grower receives varies from three 
and one-fourth to five cents per pound. The United States consumes 
annually about 18,000,000 pounds of hemp, and of this total we 
produce only about 9,000,000 pounds. 

JUTE 

Practically all of the world's supply of jute comes from the 
province of Bengal in India. Jxife is raised also in southern China 
and Formosa. It is produced from the inner bark of two plants 
which resemble hemp; although they are not related to it. The fiber 
is long, soft and glossy^ but as it has comparatively little strength 



The Fiber Plant9 317 

it is not used in the manufacture of fine textiles. Gunny-sacka, 
burlap, twine, rope, carpets and upholstery are made from jute. 
The jute mills in Bengal employ more than 100,000 persons 
Large quantities of gunny-cloth and gunny-sacking are exported 
to the United States, Chile, Australia and other countries where 
grain sacks are used extensively. Jute is also manufactured into 
burlap, and is used to cover cotton bales. 



ABAC^ OR UANILA HEMP 

By all odds the most valuable export of the Philippine Islands 
is abaci. During the last half century the value of the raw product 
has increased from about J4,- 
600,000 to some $50,000,000 I 
annually. In 1918 the value of 
the hemp exported from the 
Philippines equaled about fifty 
per cent, of the total value of ail 
exports. More than one-half of 
this was sent to the United 
States. 

The trees from which the 
6ber is obtained {Musa texHlis) 
do not belong to the hemp but 
to the plantain family, and very 
closely resemble the ordinary 
banana trees. The plants bear 
no edible fruit, however. "'"■ **--'""Xd.^"u''''l, &T{ '"^""^^ ^' 

Nothing is known of the ori- 
gin of the tree. It is probably a native of the Philippine Islands, as 
it will thrive nowhere else. On this account the islands have a 
monopoly of the Manila hemp industry. The northern part of 
Luzon is the chief center. 

Plantations are started either by planting seed or suckers. The 
planting is done during one of the rainy seasons, that is, between 
May and July, or September and November. Plants started from 
suckers mature about six months earlier than do those started from 
seed. The suckers are planted in rows from five to eight feet apart. 
For a time protection from the hot sunshine and violent winds must 
be afforded the young plants. This is secured by leaving an occa- 
sional tree if the land is being cleared, or by planting a few trees for 
that purpose. 



218 Gbogbapht 

Soil having a highdegree of fertility, and well drained, is necessary. 
Although the plants require much moisture, they do not thrive in a 
marshy soil. High relative humidity is especially desirable. As no 
animals are needed in the cultivation and harvestit^ of this crop, 
it reduces the expenses very greatly. 



Fio. 90.— Waiehing hamp upDp ddivwy at ManiU. 

Within from three to four years after planting, the crop ia ready 
to harvest. The trees are cut as close to the ground as possible, and 
as they renew themselves by means of suckers, the cutting is repeated 
every six or eight months. 

To obtain the fiber the leaf-sheaves are split into strips two or 
three inches in width, and these are drawn between the edge of a 
knife and a block of hard wood. This scrapes off the pulp. Knives 
having teeth do the work more rapidly than do the smooth ones, 
but they injure the fiber. It is estimated that the loss resulting from 
the use of crude appliances is from 20 to 30 per cent., yet for the most 
part there is little improvement in methods or tools. 

After the pulp has been scraped from the fibers the latter are hung 



The Fiber Plants 219 

across poles to dry for a few hours. They are then loosely packed 
in bundles. Before being shipped the bundles are opened, the fiber 
is given a second drying, and is then baled. 

There are three grades of commercial fiber, ''current, " ''second," 
and "colored." The current, which commands a higher price than 
the others, is light yellow in color and has a silken luster. Practically 
all of the Manila hemp exported goes to the United States and Europe 
to be made into cordage, rope and twine for the binding of grain. 
The chief use of the fiber in the United States is in the binding of 
grain. To bind an acre of wheat or oats about two pounds are 
required. Good conamercial fiber is about six feet in length. 

The hemp used for domestic purposes is employed in the manu- 
facture of a cloth known as sinanay. A beautiful cloth called lupis 
is made from the finest of the fiber. Sometimes silk and the fiber 
of the pineapple leaf are mixed with the hemp. Other articles made 
from the hemp are mats and hats. 

HENEQUEN 

Several varieties of the uenequen; or agava, are found in Mexico. 
On the table lands grow the Agava Americana, from which pulque 
is made. This much-used Mexican beverage is brought into the 
capital daily on pulque trains. In Yucatan the Agava sisalerms 
grows both wild and cultivated. This, the henequen of commerce, 
is a plant having thick leathery leaves from three to four feet in 
length, and armed on the edges and at the tip with thorns. 

The fiber of this plant, which is often called sisal hemp, because 
it first reached the outside world through the town of the same name, 
has been used in Mexico for many centuries. It has been an impor- 
tant factor in the commerce of Mexico for a comparatively short 
time, however. 

Toward the close of the eighteenth century, Spain had some 
diflSculty in supplying her navy with cordage, as the quantity of 
abaca obtained from the Philippine Islands was not sufficient for 
the demand. It was reported that Yucatan produced a valuable 
fiber, and a commission was appointed to investigate. This com- 
mission made a favorable report in 1783, and for some years henequen 
was exported to Europe. The decline of Spanish commerce put an 
end to this. 

The poverty of the people of Yucatan finally led them to once 
more turn to the agava plant as a possible source of revenue. A few 
bales of the fiber were prepared and sent to New York, where they 



220 Geography 

had a ready sale, but at a price so low as to leave little profit to the 
producer. To encourage the industry the government offered a 
prize of $10,000 for a machine that would clean a stated amount 
of fiber per hour. A Franciscan friar" won the prize by producing 
the "raspador.'' With this machine two men could do as much work 
in a given time as forty had been able to do before. This gave a 
great impetus to the cultivation of the plant. While there are now 
some half dozen kinds of fiber-cleaning machines, many of the natives 
still use the primitive tool called the pacchi. 

A thin, rocky limestone soil is said to produce a fiber of the great- 
est tensile strength, although a richer soil grows longer and more 
flexible fiber. The plant grows best in a belt about twelve miles 
from the coast and some seventy miles in width. It may be propa- 
gated by seed, cuttings or suckers. The third method is the conamon 
practice. The suckers are planted just before the rainy season in 
rows about eight feet apart, while the plants in each row are separated 
by a distance of four feet. 

The plant needs little care beyond weeding. It is drought-resist- 
ant, but fire is its great enemy. A black beetle also does some 
damage. In about five years after planting, the earlier leaves begin 
to extend themselves at right angles to the plant. The fiber has then 
reached its greatest tensile strength and is ready to cut. 

With long knives called corbas workmen sever the leaves 
from the plant, trim off the thorns and bind the leaves in bundles. 
Tramcars then haul them to the cleaning machine. Here rapidly 
revolving wheels set with knives tear th^ pulp from the fiber. The 
pulp is washed away by water running through the machine. The 
fiber is next taken to the drying grounds, where it is bleached in the 
sun for two or three days, after which it is baled under great pressure. 

The fiber, which is three to four feet long, is white in color and 
constitutes about four per cent, of the leaf. There is much difference 
in the quality of the fiber, and growers are striving for improvement. 
Some plants will continue to produce for twenty years, while some 
cease production at the end of six or eight years. The end of the 
productive period is brought about by the blossoming pf the plant. 

Henequen is used in the manufacture of sacking, cordage, and 
binder^s twine. In Mexico it is used in making mats and hammocks. 
In making the finest grade of hammocks the native will use only the 
hand- cleaned fiber. 

The growing of henequen is assuming considerable importance 
in the Bahama Islands, Cuba and Hawaii, although the industry 



The Fiber Plants 221 

is chiefly centered in Yucatan. Progreso and Campeche are the 
great exporting centers, and most of the product goes to the United 
States. This fiber constitutes about 16 per cent, of the exports of 
Mexico, and is surpassed by silver only. 

STUDIES 

What countries would be seriously affected by a partial failure of the cotton 
crop in the United States? Is there any reason for believing that the manufacture 
of cotton goods in the United States will be entirely shifted to the South? Locate 
the European centers where Unen is extensively manufactured. Why can not 
we successfully compete with European countries in the manufacture of linen? 
Why do we import so much Manila hemp and henequen? 

REFERENCES 

*'Boll Weevil versus the Red Ant." NcU. Geog. Mag., vol. xv, p. 262. 
BooLEY, H. L.: U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Farmers' BvU. No. 274 (Flax). 
*' Flaxseed." Jour, of Geo., vol. ii, p. 427. 

KiNNE and Cooley: "Shelter and Clothing," chapters viii, ix, xi, xii. 
McBride, George McCutcheon : "Cotton and Human Affairs." Jour, of Geog., 

March, 1920. 
McBride, George McCutcheon: "Cotton Growing in South America." 

Geog. jKev. 9:35, Jan., 1920. 
Peake, R. J.: "Cotton." 

ScHERER, J. A. B.: "Cotton as a World Power." 
Thompson, E. H.: "Hennequin, The Yucatan Fiber." Nat. Geog. Mag., vol. 

xiv, p. 150. 
Wilkinson, F.: "The Story of the Cotton Plant." 
Yearbooks, U. S. Department of Agriculture. 



CHAPTER XX 
Beverage Plants 

COFFEE 

Coffee is in no sense a necessity, and yet the United States spends 
roughly $75,000,000 annually for this commodity. We are the 
greatest consumers of coffee in the world, and most of our supply 
as well as that of the rest of the world comes from the state of Sao 
Paulo, in Bra;5il. Central America, Mexico, the West Indies, the 
Hawaiian, the Philippine and the East Indian Islands, Ceylon and 
Arabia are other coffee-producing regions. Since coffee is a native 
of the Far East, the fact that Brazil is now the chief producer is an 
interesting one. 

Coffee growing is the one great industry on the rich red soils 
found in the state of Sao Paulo. There are approximately 700,000,000 
coffee trees in the state. The coffee industry has led to a rapid in- 
crease in population, to building of railroads, to harbor improve- 
ments, and incidentally to development in many other lines. 

Regarding the influence of coffee upon the growth of Sao Paulo, 
Bryce says: ''Since 1875 the planting of enormous tracts of land 
with coffee has rapidly raised the wealth of the region, and this city, 
being its heart and center, has risen in sixty years from a small 
country town to be a place of four hundred thousand inhabitants."^ 

For the successful growing of coffee a high temperature and 
abundant rainfall are required. In Brazil coffee growing is most 
successful at the altitude of about 2,000 feet. When young, the 
plants need some shade. 

In its natural state the coffee-producing area of Brazil is forested. 
Therefore the first step in establishing a coffee plantation is the clear- 
ing of the land. Usually the plants are started in nurseries. When 
transplanted they are set out in rows about 14 feet apart each way. 
A full crop is not obtained until the trees are about six years old. 

The picking is done by hand, the fruit or coffee 6erries, being 
stripped from the branches. As the trees are usually kept pruned 
down to a height of eight to ten feet, most of the work can be done 
without the use of ladders. 

^Bryce, James: "South Ameiica," p. 375. 
222 



Beveraoe Plants 223 

In Brazil the harvest season is from May to September. During 
this period very little rain falls, and therefore the drying of the coffee 
is facilitated. The laborers are Portuguese. They live in their own 
quarters on the plantations, or fazendas. Men, women and children 
take part in the picking. Many of the fazendas are £0 extensive 
that the workers carry luncheon with them. 



Usually two coffee beans, with their flat sides together, are en- 
closed hy the pulp of the berry. The pulp may be removed by soaking 
the berries in water or by hulling. Generally the first, known as 
the wet method, is employed. 

The drying of the beans takes place in the open air on floors of 
brick or tile. As the taste of the beverage depends, in large measure, 
upon the drying process, the coffee is very carefully watched by the 
superintendent. It is stirred at frequent interyals, and each evening 
raked up in piles, and sometimes covered as a protection against dew. 
Under certain conditions the beans may dry sufficiently in a few 
hours, but the process usually requires several days. 



224 Geography 

Each coffee bean is surrounded by two membranes, which must 
be removed before the coffee is ready for the market. This is done 
in a huUing machine, which on the larger plantations is operated 
by machinery. Following the hulling, the beans are winnowed, 
to remove dirt and broken hulls, sorted and put up in sacks contain- 
ing 132 pounds each. 

Coffee exhausts the soil after several years of cropping, and land 
which no longer yields a crop is by some planters left to revert to a 
forest condition. "Many of the coffee plantations of forty or even 
thirty years ago have been abandoned, and their sites are now 
practically indistinguishable from the rest of the forest."^ 

Santos is the natural outlet for the coffee of fche state of Sao 
Paulo. " In Santos coffee absolutely dominates the lives of the people. 
Coffee is everywhere — on the streets, in the warehouses, on the 
trains. Every one is busy with coffee. The docks are lined, two 
or three miles of steamers, often lying two abreast, all waiting to load 
coffee — a wonderful sight — steamers flying the British flag, and the 
German flag, and the French flag, and the Brazilian flag — steamers 
flying almost every known flag except our own glorious Stars and 
Stripes.^ Here in Santos, in the big warehouses lighted from above, 
the coffee dealers carefully blend and repack the precious berries. 
Here the holds of the waiting steamers are filled almost to the burst- 
ing point with the well-known flat bags of coffee. Here the traveler 
sees the last step in the progress of the coffee berry, from the time 
it ripens on the tree until it leaves Brazilian soil, to furnish some 
breakfast table in a far-off land with the favorite morning beverage 
of the civiUzed world. "^ 

TEA 

Among the important commodities which we obtain from the 
Orient is tea. The tea plant has been grown in China for many 
centuries, but tea was used as a medicine until 550 a.d. In 1657 
a tea house was established in London. Until 1837 China had a 
monopoly practically of the tea trade of the world, but today India, 
Ceylon, Formosa, Japan and the Dutch East Indies are important 
producers. 

^Bryce, James; "South America," p. 390. 

*rhe reference to our flag no longer holds true. Today the Stars and 
Stripes fly in every great harbor of the world, for one result of the World War 
was the expansion of our merchant marine. 

^Ward, Robert DeC: National Geographic Magazine, vol. xxii, p. 931 



Beverage Planto 225 

The plants are propagated in nurseries and transplanted to the 
tea farms. A crop can be gathered in from three to four years after 
transplanting. The life of the plant is about 25 years. 

The plant is an evergreen which, because of frequent pruning, 
is kept down to a height varying from three to six feet. Under natural 
conditions the tree would reach the height of twenty-five feet. The 
pruning insures a better quality of tea, and makes the picking of 



the leaves le^ expensive. The blossoms are fragrant, and white 
or rose -colored. 

Climatic Conditions. — The tea plant requires a tropical or sub- 
tropical climate, and about 50 inches of rainfall per annum. More 
than one-half of this total should fall during the growing season. 

Kcking and Preparation. — The leaves are picked by hand, and 
there are several pickings each season. In the tea sheds the leaves 
are placed on bamboo mats or trays and turned at short intervals 
until they are shghtly wilted. Next they are roasted or "fired" 
in metal pans or kettles over charcoal fires. This causes the leaves 
to soften, and they are then placed on tables and rolled by hand. ■ 
After this they are given a second roasting. Of course there are many 
modifications of the process. 
15 



226 Geography 

For a long time it was supposed that green and black teas came 
from different plants, but this is now known not to be the 
case. If black tea is desired,- it is left exposed to the air until oxi- 
dation occurs. 

Formerly tea was adulterated to a great extent, but this is not 
so conmion at the present time. Prussian blue, indigo, turmeric, 
soapstone and the leaves of certain plants are used as adulterants. 
In China, tea is largely prepared by hand, and consequently many 
object to it. India and Ceylon teas are handled by machinery, and 
are therefore more sanitary. 

Tea-growing in the United States. — ^About 100 years ago a 
French botanist, Michaux by name, planted some tea in the United 
States on the Ashley River, some 15 miles from Charleston, South 
Carolina. In 1848 Dr. Junius Smith undertook the growing of tea 
near Greenville, in the same state. Ten years later Robert Fortune 
was sent by our government to China to study the tea industry. 

As a result of these beginnings there is located near Summerville, 
South Carolina, the "Pinehursf tea gardens, consisting of about 
100 acres. The annual output now amounts to from 14,000 to 16,000 
pounds. This finds a ready market at high prices. 

Trade. — China's tea trade, although still enormous, has fallen off 
in recent years. Great quantities of tea are pressed into bricks at 
Hankow and sent on camel back to Russia, which is China's best 
customer in the tea trade. Not all of the tea sent from China to 
Russia goes overland, as much is sent by ship to Odessa. 

The people of the United Kingdom use more tea per capita than 
do the people of any other country except Australia. The average 
amount imported by the British Isles for the years 1910 to 1915 
inclusive was, in round numbers, 300,000,000 pounds. For the years 
1913 to 1918 inclusive, the average annual importation of tea into 
the United States amounted to about 110,000,000 pounds, with an 
approximate value of $20,000,000. The United States is the world's 
greatest consumer of green tea. 

COCOA 

The production of the three great table beverages, cofifee, tea and 
cocoa, is limited to the warmer parts of the world. Cocoa is a product 
of the cacao tree, which is extensively grown in Ecuador, Venezuela, 
Brazil, Mexico, the East Indies and Ceylon. The larger part of the 
world's supply comes from the Americas. 

When first the Spaniards came to the New World they found the 



Beverage Plants 227 

natives of Mexico and South America using a drink called by them 
"Chocolatl." In time the use of cocoa and chocolate was introduced 
by the Spanish explorers into their own country. 

The cacao tree bears pods varying from six inches to a foot in 
length. They are pear-shaped, and somewhat fluted. When ripe 
they resemble cucumbers in appearance. Instead of being attached 
to the ends of the twigs, the pods grow directly from the trunks of 



FiDr 93. — Gatherine cocoa pods. 

the trees and larger branches. Within the ppds are seeds, often 
as many as 50, about as large as almonds. It is from the seed that 
cocoa and chocolate are made. 

When harvest time occurs, the pods are cut from the trees by 
workmen carrying poles to one end of which knives are attached. 
The pods are allowed to fall to the ground, where they usuallyremain 
for a day before being opened for the removal of the seed. 

The seeds are dried on floors or platforms, much as is coffee. When 
thoroughly dried the seeds, which at first are white, are brick-red 
in color. They are shipped in sacks containing about 150 pounds 
each. Ecuadorian cocoa is exported from Guayaquil. La Guaira 
is the shipping point in Venezuela. 



228 Geography 

After the cocoa has reached its destination it is roasted. This 
develops the pleasant aroma. The next process is the grinding of 
the seed. From the resulting flour an oil substance called "cocoa 
butter" is separated. After the removal of the cocoa butter the 
flour is known as cocoa, before the removal of the cocoa butter it is 
chocolate. Chocolate in its natural state is bitter. Sweet chocolate 
is made by adding sugar to chocolate. 

When in a pasty condition chocolate is run into moulds and allowed 
to cool. Cocoa is sold in the form of a flour or powder. As milk is 
extensively used in the manufacture of chocolate, this industry is 
important in countries where dairying is a leading industry. Holland, 
Switzerland and the United States are manufacturers of chocolate 
on a large scale. The city of Amsterdam, Holland, practically con- 
trols the. price of the raw product. 

In the year 1765 there was built at Dorchester, Massachusetts, 
on the Neponset River, the first cocoa and chocolate plant in what 
is now the United States. Today the establishment of the Baker 
Chocolate Company occupies this same site. 

mat6 

Unlike coffee, tea and cocoa, mat^ does not enter into the com- 
merce of the world. It is used extensively in Paraguay, of which 
country the plant from which it ismade is a native, and in Uruguay, 
Brazil, and Argentine Republic. Paraguay produces some 18,000,- 
000 pounds of mat6 annually, about one-half of which is consumed 
in thatt country. 

Mat6, which is also called Paraguayan tea, is made from the 
leaves of a species of the holly plant. The beverage contains caffeine, 
the same stimulating element found in tea and coffee. 

The leaves are gathered during the dry season, and after being 
thoroughly dried, are crushed or beaten up into small pieces. The 
product is then shipped in sacks of about 200 pounds each. 

When mate is to be served, some of the powdered material is 
placed in a gourd and hot water poured over it. The tea is drunk 
through a long tube called a bombilla. The lower end of the bom- 
billa is enlarged and perforated. Thus the leaves are excluded 
from the tube. 

So universal is the custom of drinking mat^ in the countries 
mentioned, that the gourd and the bombilla are generally passed 
whenever a family has callers. 



Beverage Plants 229 

STUDIES 

Locate the chief cofFee-producing areas. What is the per capita consumption 
of coffee in this country? Would it be possible for the United States to grow 
enough tea to meet the home demand? Discuss the labor conditions which 
apply to the tea industry. On a map of the world locate the cocoa-producing 
regions. 

REFERENCES 

"Coffee, Tea and Cocoa Imports of the U. S." Jmir. of Geog., vol. vii, p. 165. 
** Coffee, Origin and Propagation, Introduction and Cultivation in Costa Rica." 

Jowr. of Geog.f vol. iv, p. 460. 
Ibbbtson, a.: "Tea." 
Kbable, B. B.: "Coffee." 
Mitchell, George F.: U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Farmer's Bull. No. 301 

(Home-Grown Tea). 
Ward, Robert DeC: "Brazilian Coffee Country." Nat. Geog. Ma^g.^ vol. xxii, 

p. 908. 
Yearbooks, U. S. Dept. of Agriculture. 



CHAPTER XXI 
Fruits 

General Statement. — The term fruit, as used in botany and in 
ordinary conversation, has quite different meanings. In a botanical 
sense the term refers to that part of a plant which bears the seed. 
As the word fruit is generally employed, it applies to the crops of 
certain trees such as the apple, peach, cherry, orange, banana and 
many others. 

Although fruits and berries are very largely used as ai1,icles of 
food, their actual nutritive value is not high. The acids and oils 
which they contain cause them to be palatable, and they aid in the 
process of digestion. Certain fruits, such as the fig and the prune, 
have a special value because of their laxative nature. Olives possess 
considerable food value, being about 15 per cent. oil. 

Apples. — Of the common orchard fruits, the apple is the most 
important. It is believed to be a native of southwestern Asia. 
There are about 1,000 varieties of apples, all of which have been 
derived from two wild varieties. Apples are grown extensively in 
the British Isles, France, New Zealand, Canada and the United States. 

The United States exports both fresh and dried apples in large 
quantities. The value of the apple crop in bur country is more 
than one-half that of all fruits, and amounted in 1918 to about $200,- 
000,000. The chief apple-growing states are: New York, Pennsyl- 
vania, Michigan and Missouri; New York being far in the lead. 

The loss inflicted by the codling moth in the United States 
alone amounts to millions of dollars annually. It has been discov- 
ered that the downy woodpecker, by boring into the bark of trees, 
destroys large numbers of the larvae, but spraying is resorted to 
as a more effective check. 

Apples are peeled, cored and sliced by machinery, and dried by 
artificial heat. Better methods of storing fresh fruit are leading to 
a decrease in the quantity dried. Some apples are used in the manu- 
facture of cider and vinegar, and in France much apple jelly is made. 

Peaches. — ^Peaches are grown extensively in the United States, 
Canada, New Zealand and the Mediterranean countries. In our 
country, peaches rank next to apples in value. The chief producing 
states are: California, Georgia, Arkansas, New York, Michigan and 
Kentucky. The influence of the Great Lakes upon the peach indus- 
try is quite marked. In the lower peninsula of Michigan, in western 
230 



232 Geography 

New York and in peninsular Canada the lakes check the advance 
of spring. Fruit trees therefore do not commonly blossom early 
enough to have the crop damaged by late frosts. West of the lakes, 
in the same latitude, the winds blow over a land area, which, warming 
quickly, starts the buds before, the danger from spring frosts is over. 

Peaches are both dried and canned in large quantities. The long, 
dry summers with high temperature which prevails in California 
are favorable to the drying of the fruit out of doors. In more humid 
regions the peaches are dried by artificial heat, which increases the 
cost. In 1918 the people of the United States produced 20,500,000 
bushels of peaches. 

In the drying process the 'first operation is the cutting of the 
peach into two equal parts and the removal of the stone. This is done 
by hand. The fruit is then placed upon shallow wooden trays, and 
these, piled one upon another, are placed in a fumigator. This 
is in effect a very large box, and is commonly made of heavy paper 
nailed to a light frame. In the fumigator a small quantity of sulphur 
is burned. This gives the peaches a golden appearance, and acts as 
a preservative. 

After a few hours in the fumigator the trays are spread out upon 
the drying ground, where they remain for two or three days. The 
number of pounds of green fruit required to make a pound of dried 
fruit depends upon the degree of juiciness. From three to five pounds 
is about the average. 

Prunes. — ^Although there are himdreds of varieties of plums, 
most of them have comparatively little commercial value. They 
must be used fresh or else canned, because they cannot be success- 
fully dried without removing the pit. The small size of the fruit 
makes this operation expensive. The prune is a variety of the plum 
which dries sweet without the removal of the pit, and it therefore 
is of great value. 

France, the Balkan States and the United States are the chief 
prune-producing areas of the world. The output of this country- 
comes almost entirely from California and Oregon. California pro- 
duces approximately one-half of the world's crop. Santa Clara 
County, California, is especially noted, and the city of San Jose is 
probably the world's greatest prune center. 

After being picked the fruit is usually dipped in hot water or lye 
to soften the outer skin. Quite generally the skin is pricked by 
machinery. This allows the excess of water to evaporate readily 
and prevents fermentation. In California prunes are dried in the 



234 Geography 

open air in trays about three by eight feet in dimensions. This 
process requires from three days to a week, depending upon weather 
conditions. After drying, the fruit is given a gloss by heating it in 
steam or immersing it in a fruit juice. 

Fancy prunes are packed in boxes, but ordinary grades are 
shipped in bags and barrels. In 1887 the United States imported more 
than 92,000,000 pounds of prunes and plums. In 1918 we exported 
more than 30,000,000 pounds. 

Grapes, Raisins, Wine. — Grapes are grown in many parts of the 
world, and in large cities are used in great quantities. They are of 
chief value, however, in their dried state (raisins and currants) and 
in the form of wine and brandy. 

Although the grape has a wide range, the production of raisins 
is limited to a few areas. This is because a very dry climate is re- 
quired for the curing of the fruit. There should be freedom from 
storms during the drying season. Spain, Asiatic Turkey and Cali- 
fornia ptoduce the bulk of the world's supply of raisins. In our 
country the industry is practically confined to three counties of 
California — Fresno, Kings and Tulare. The first of these is the most 
important. The climatic conditions are practically ideal for the 
industry. Summer storms are of very rare occurrence, the tempera- 
ture is high, the humidity low, and fogs seldom occur during the 
drying period. 

Grapes are cut from the vines and dried upon trays. At the 
packing plant the raisins are stemmed and seeded by machinery, and 
a part of the work of packing is done in this way. Such grapes as 
the Muscat and Thompson 's Seedless are the best for the production 
of raisins, because their skins are thin and their sugar content high. 

In 1899 the United States produced 15,000,000 pounds of raisins, 
and in 1909, 195,000,000 pounds. We are now exporters, although 
certain kinds are imported, chiefly what are known as Zante "cur- 
rants.^' Malaga is the exporting center of Spain. 

Raisins have a high food value, as they contain 63 per cent, of 
carbohydrates, 5 per cent, of protein, and some fat. A pound of 
raisins is the equivalent of 4J^ pounds of potatoes, 4 pounds of milk, 
2 pounds of eggs, l}i pounds of beef, or 1 pound of bread. Owing 
to this, and to convenience attaching to their transportation, their 
use in the army and by mountain climbers is increasing. In Great 
Britain 5 pounds of raisins per capita are consumed yearly; in the 
United States, 1}/^ pounds. In order to encourage their consumption 
at home a ''raisin" day was established several years ago. 



Fruito 235 

France, Italy and Spain are the great wine producers of the world. 
The United States, Ai^entina and Germany are less important. 
In some cases the grapes are hauled to the wineries in metal wagons, 
where they are unloaded onto cement platforms. Machinery conveys 
the grapes to the grinder. Here the stems and seeds are removed 
and the juice carried in pipes to vats and tanks, where the process 
is completed. The great casks into which the wine is finally run are 
labeled to show variety and date. 



For centuries the making of wine has been important in western 
Europe. The early settlers in America tried to introduce the Euro- 
pean grape from which wine is made, but were unsuccessful because 
of a disease which attacked the vines. It was found that this 
variety of grape would flourish in California. This is the reason why 
the wine industry was important in California but not in the grape- 
growing sections in the eastern part of America. Excellent varieties 
of table grapes such as the Catawba were developed from the eastern 
native vines. 

Citrus Fruits. — The orange, lemon, grapefruit (pomelo), lime, 
tangerine, kumquat and mandarin are citrus fruits. The three first 
named are the most important. Citrus fruits are semitropical 



236 Geography 

products. The chief output comes from the Mediterranean coun- 
tries, the West Indies, Mexico, southern California and Florida. 

The production and marketing of these crops is expensive, 
and the cost of the nursery stock is high. Trees must in 
some areas be irrigated, and in some sprayed or fumigated to rid 
them of a pest known aa scale, and much money is spent in guarding 
against frost. 

Owing to cheap labor, iow coat of living, and cheap water trans- 
portation in the countries mentioned other than our own, the citrus 



fruit districts in the United States cannot, without a duty, success- 
fully compete for our own markets. 

Citrus fruits are very easily injured by frost. This is especially 
true of lemons. In both Florida and California the Weather Bureau 
Service is of very great value to growers. Special stations have been 
established, and warnings are sent out by telephone as well as in the 
ordinary way. 

Owing to the fact that the winds blow directly from the ocean 
to California, it is not so subject to frost as is Florida. In the case 
of Florida, winter storms from the northwest occasionally move over 
it, causing great damage to the fruit. This was especially true in 
1894-5, when the industry was neariy ruined. In 1912 California 
suffered tremendous loss on account of frost, Lai^ sums of money 
are spent in smuc^ing to prevent a fall in temperature to the danger 



Fruits 237 

point, and many growers have put in heating plants in which gas 
or oil is burned. 

The United States produced in 1909 more than $22,000,000 
worth of citrus fruits. The increase during the decade ending in 
that year was 231 per cent. The value of the oranges is about three 
times as great as that of the lemons and grapefruit combined. In 
the five-year period ending with 1908, California produced about 
70 per cent, of our oranges and nearly all of our lemons. 

Olives. — ^The olive tree is more resistant to frost than is the 
orange or lemon. It will endure a minimum temperature of about 
14° F. The important olive-growing countries are: France, Portugal, 
Spain, Italy, Greece, Turkey, Algeria, Tunisia and California. 

One of the advantages in connection with olive culture is found 
in the long life of the tree — often more than a century, and in some 
cases several centuries.* 

The ripe fruit of the olive tree, although very attractive, is not fit 
for food in its natural condition. This is because of its very bitter 
taste, probably due to the presence of certain gums or resins. These 
substances are removed by giving the olive repeated baths in water, 
or soaking it for a time in lye. 

The olive is an excellent food because of the large percentage 
of oil that it contains, about 15 per cent. The oil is extracted for 
table use by crushing the fruit. A slight crushing yields the best 
quality of oil, and inferior grades are obtained by a second and third 
crushing. In the Mediterranean countries, where, owing to density 
of population and a dry season, cattle are not raised in large numbers, 
the olive takes the place of butter and meat. 

Italy is probably the home of the oliye tree, and Italy ranks first 
as a producer of olive oil. In Italy there are thousands of estabUsh- 
ments where olive oil is produced. In many places the oil is extracted 
by very primitive means, and is of an inferior grade. Sicily and the 
region tributary to Naples are the most productive areas, for in 
southern Italy the climate is better adapted to olive-growing than 
is that of northern Italy. 

The Spaniards introduced the olive into California in connection 
with the establishment of the chain of missions along the coast. 
E^ach one of these had its olive grove and its press for the production 
of oil. Practically all of the olives and olive oil produced in the 
United States come from California. In 1917 our country imported 
more than 7,000,000 gallons of olive oil for table use at a cost exceed- 
ing $1.35 per gallon. 



238 Geography 

Kneapples. — This fruit is very susceptible to frost, and does best 
where the mean annual temperature is from 75° to 80° F. It requires 
an open soil that permite free di"ainage. The chief pineapple 
areaa are: Northern Africa, the Madeira, Canary, Azores, Bahama, 
West Indian and Hawaiian Islands and Florida. The plant is a 
native of America, and was discovered in South America by the 
Spanish explorers. 

A pineapple plantation is called a "pinery, "and picking the fruit 



FlQ. 98.— Where the pinespplea grow. (U. 8. D. A.)' 

is known as "breaking pines," because picking usually consists in 
breaking the stem, although some workmen use knives. When crated, 
the fruit is generally wrapped in papers. 

Europe receives her supply of this fruit from northern Africa, 
Madeira, the Canary and the Azores Islands. The Bahamas, the 
West Indies and Florida supply the eastern markets in our country. 
Our Pacific Coast States depend upon the Hawaiian Islands. In 1909 
Florida produced nearly 800,000 crates, valued at practically 11.00 
per crate. Owing to the limited distribution of the pineapple, the 
price is high. Considerable quantities are canned in the Hawaiian 
Islands, and some of the fruit in its natural condition is shipped to 
San Francisco. 



Fruits 239 

Bananas. — The banana is a tropical p-ant requiring a high tem- 
perature and much moisture. . The plant is not a tree in the ordinary- 
sense of that term, but consists rather of one or several stalks from 
which leaves unroll. The leaves are from ten to fifteen feet in length, 
and usually present a ragged appearance because they are so easily 
torn by the wind. 

Banana plantations are established by planting suckers about 
fifteen feet apart. Within a year after planting the suckers bear 
fruit. As new sprouts are constantly starting from the parent plant, 
the yield of fruit is practically continuous. 

The large clusters of bananas that form the bunches are called 
handsy and the individual bananas fingers. A bunch consisting of 
nine or more hands is called a "first,'' while one of from seven to 
nine hands is called a "second." Buyers will seldom accept 
bunches containing less than six hands. A hand contains from ten 
to twenty bananas. 

The fruit is cut when green, both because it is bruised so easily, 
and because it does not ripen well on the plant. If it were not for 
the fact that the banana ripens well after being cut from the plant 
it would have little commercial value. The stalks are cut at the same 
time, as they are of no value after having borne their crop, which may 
be from one to three bunches each. A bunch weighs from 50 to 60 
pounds. The fruit presents a curious appearance as it hangs on the 
tree with the fingers pointing upward. 

After the bunches are cut from the stalks they are wrapped 
in leaves to protect them as much as possible, and are then conveyed 
to the nearest point of shipment. Sometimes mules are used in 
transporting the fruit, and in some cases canoes convey it to larger 
boats. The fruit is inspected at the vessel, and undesirable bunches 
are rejected. The bunches are packed on end in the hold of the 
vessel, the ordinary " fruiter " carrying from 15,000 to 20,000 bunches. 
The planter receives from ten. to thirty-five cents per bunch for his 
fruit. As the bunches probably average eight dozen bananas each, 
the price to the producer seems low. 

Central America, Jamaica, Cuba, Hawaii, the Samoan and the Fiji 
Inlands produce bananas in abundance. The eastern part of the 
United States derives its supply chiefly from the West Indies, while 
the Pacific Coast is largely supplied from Costa Rica. The fruit 
goes by water to New Orleans, and thence by rail to Pacific Coast 
points. It is this long land haul that accounts for the high price 
of bananas in our Western States. Bluefields and Port Limon are 



Fruits 241 

both important exporting points. Our average annual importation 
for the five-year period ending with 1918 was about 40,000,000 
bunches. For this fruit we pay yearly more than $13,000,000. 

In the tropics bananas are an important article of food, and they 
are cooked in a variety of ways. Ripe bananas contain about 22 
per cent, of carbohydrates, and a given area when planted to this 
fruit will sustain five times as many persons as it would if planted 
to grain. This is a fact of great importance, for in the areas where 
the banana is a staple article of food climatic conditions are such 
as greatly to discourage huinan effort. From banana meal, cakes 
and bread are made. After being dipped in lye the fruit will keep 
almost indefinitely, and in this form is often carried long distances 
as a food. The tender shoots of the plant are sometimes used as 
a vegetable. A kind of wine is made by fermenting the juice, and 
the leaves enter into basket-making, and are used in thatching roofs. 

Dates. — ^Among the many achievements of the United States 
Department of Agriculture during the last decade is the intro- 
duction and successful cultivation of the date palm tree. For 
several thousand years the date has been an important article of 
food along the historic Nile and Euphrates. In these modem days 
it enters largely into the commerce of the Sahara, Arabia, Persia and 
Turkey. One of the best date-producing regions is the Beled el 
Jerid (Land of the Palms)! This area comprises several oases situ- 
ated about 250 miles southwest of Tunis. There are about 30,000 
people in this section, and they depend almost entirely upon the 
date industry. 

The tree is a beautiful one, often rising to a height of 50 or. 60 
feet without a limb, and having a crown of feathery branches or 
leaves from 10 to 15 feet in length. During the youth of the tree, 
suckers or sprouts spring from its base, thus producing a thicket. 
Sprouts do not grow from old trees. The age of the date palm tree 
can not be told by the ordinary method, as it does not produce the 
rings within the wood, neither does the trunk continue to increase 
in diameter with increasing age. 

The date palm may be propagated from seed or shoots, the latter 
being employed in order to save time. While the Arabs use no order 
in setting out trees, the French in their Saharan groves plant rows 
from 20 to 30 feet apart. While the trees are young the ground is 
used for some other crop, often grain. Only the female trees produce 
fruit, and in order to avoid cultivating a large number of non-produc- 
tive trees, pollination is performed by man. A twig from a cluster 

16 



242 Geography 

of male flowers is placed within a sheath bearing a cluster of female 
flowers, and thus pollination is accomplished. 

Within from four to eight years after planting, the trees begin 
to bear, and under favorable conditions continue to yield for a 
century. From 100 to 200 pounds of fruit is the average crop for 
a tree, although a single tree has been known to yield 600 pounds. 



The fruit grows in bunches weighing from 10 to 40 pounds each. 
In gathering the most valuable varieties of dates from tall trees 
six or eight men may be required, as the bunches are handed from 
man to man stationed along the tree trunk. The less valuable fruit 
is dropped from the tree. The Deglet Noor is one of the finest 
varieties. It is imported extensively by Europeans and Americans. 

Although the date palm flourishes in arid regions, it requires 
a continuous supply of water at its roots. An old Arab proverb 
says, "The date palm, the queen of trees, must have her feet in 
running water and her head in the burning sky." The tree is irri- 
gated much more frequently than are orange or lemon trees. In the 



Fruits 243 

Algerian Sahara the French count on twenty-four urigations per 
year, seventeen of these occurring from June to September inclusive. 
In regions where the humidity is higher, or where water is close 
to the surface, not so much water is needed for irrigation. 

The question of fertilizing the soil is a very important one in 
the desert regions where little live stock is kept. Commercialfertilizers 
are of course expensive. Leguminous plants, such as the alfalfa, are, 
because they can fix the free nitrogen of the air and store it up 
within themselves, of great value in date-palm culture. 

For its successful cultivation the date palm must have a hot 
climate, and for the profitable preparation of the fruit there must 
be high temperature and a dry atmosphere. Although the tree will 
endure a lower temperature than the orange tree, a winter that would 
not injure a peach tree would kill a date palm. The tree will grow and 
flourish in regions in which it will not bear fruit. In southwestern 
California the date palm is a very common ornamental tree, yet it 
does not mature its fruit on account of the cooling effect of the steady 
sea breeze. Owing to this same breeze from the ocean, the air is too 
htunid for the ripening of the date. Rains injure and sometimes 
destroy a crop. The mean temperature should be more than 70*^ 
F. during the entire fruiting season, and for one month more than 
80^ F. An examination of seasonal isothermal charts will show that 
there are few areas where these and the other necessary conditions 
obtain, and therefore the distribution of the date palm is very limited. 
A winter temperature above 20° F. seldom injures a date palm tree, 
and under certain conditions a somewhat lower temperature may be 
endured. Young trees, and trees not dormant, are injured most 
easily by the cold. 

A peculiarity of the date palm enables the grower to thin the 
fruit in the most economical manner. Three fruits develop from 
each flower. If the flowers are pollinated, but one of these clings 
to the tree. If the flowers were not pollinated, none of the fruits 
fall. Such fruits are worthless, and are therefore cut off, relieving 
the tree of a useless burden. 

When fully ripe, dates are reddish-brown or black in color, and 
sometimes contain as much as 60 per cent, of sugar. Sometimes the 
whole bunch is cut off at once, or again only the fully ripe dates are 
picked, leaving the others to ripen and be picked at a later time. 
The fruit is exported in boxes or leather bags. 

It is possible to grow dates successfully in a few parts of the United 
States. In California there is one section^ namely, the southeastern 



244 Geography 

part of the state. The Colorado desert is well adapted to date culture. 
The summer temperatures are high, the air is dry, and the winters 
are mild. 

In the Salt River valley, Arizona, dates are successfully grown. 
Much work has been done by the Department of Agriculture and the 
University of Arizona. In 1899-1900 about 400 young trees were 
imported from the Algerian Sahara and set out near Tempe. At the 
present time it seems Ukely that the United States can, in the near 
future, supply the home markets with domestic dates of the best 
quality, and as we import more than $500,000 worth annually this 
will be quite an important item. 

STUDIES 

What kinds of fruits are extensively produced in your state? Does the 
growing of fruit in your state lead to other industries? With what parts of 
Europe do Florida and California compete in marketing citrus fruits? Why is 
the cost of shipping citrus fruits from California to the central and eastern parts 
of our country so high? Do we have a duty on citrus fniits? Can bananas 
be grown in the United States? Compare bananas and wheat as to their per- 
centage of carbohydrates. Why are so manj' apples grown in the western part 
of New York State? 

REFERENCES 

Fraser, Edwin R.: "Where Oiu* Bananas Come From." Nat, Geog. Mag., 
vol. xxiii, p. 713. 

Kearney, Thomas H.: "The Date Gardens of the Jerid." Nat. Geog. Mag., 
vol. xxi, p. 643. 

Rolfs, Peter H.: "Pineapple Growing." United States Department of Agri- 
culture, Farmers' Bulletin No. 140. 

Yearbooks, United States Department of Agriculture. 



CHAPTER XXII 
Miscellaneous Crops 
cane sugar 
General Statement. — Cane sugar is the product of a plant belong- 
ing to the grass family. It flourishes in warm, moist regions, but for 



Flo. 101.— Sugar plaatation neu- Caralina, Porto Rico. (U. 8. D. A.) 

its profitable production requires a soil rich in phosphates. The 
cultivation and production of cane sugar require a greater amount 
of labor than any other crop but tobacco. Cheap labor is therefore 
another essential for its production. ' Sugar is our most valuable 
import, amounting to more than $100,000,000 annually. We are 
the largest users of sugar in the world, consuming about 80 pounds 
per capita yearly. 

Distribution. — The chief cane sugar-producing countries are 
India, Cuba, Java and the United States. Nearly all of the cane 
sugar produced in our country comes from Louisiana. 



246 



Geography 



After the ground has been prepared, cuttings of the cane are 
dropped in furrows. From these grow the canes, which mature in 
about ten months. Sugar cane resembles com, having joints with 
a spongy substance between, in which the juice is held. The canes 
vary from six feet to twenty feet in height, and from one to one and 
one-half inches in diameter. The canes are cut by hand, in sections 
about five feet long, and then loaded on tramcars which s^e run into 

the fields. A machine by means 
of which sugar cane can be cut is 
a much-needed improvement. 

Manufacture. — The tramcars 
haul the canes to the mill, where 
they are run between powerful 
s};eam rollers which squeeze the 
juice from the spongy matter. 
The stalks yield from 75 to 90 per 
cent, of juice and about 10 per 
cent, of the juice is sugar. After 
being put through the rollers, the 
stalks are sometimes used as fuel 
in the mill. The juice is now 
Fio. io2.--Worid'8 production of cane sugar, clarified and then stcrilizcd at 

Percentages by countriea. 1913-1917 inclusive. ^ temperature of 130° F. This 

sterilizing prevents fermentation, which would interfere with the 
crystallization. The sugar is now boiled until it reaches the point 
of crystallizing, when it is placed in centrifugal separators. Brown 
sugar and molasses are the products of this operation. The crude 
sugar then goes to the refineries, which are generally situated 
outside of the sugar-producing areas. This is because the cost of 
shipping crude and refined sugar is practically the same, and because 
the producing areas are not industrial regions. Brooklyn, Jersey City, 
Philadelphia, Boston, Baltimore, New Orleans and San Francisco 
are the chief refining centers in our country. The sugar is taken 
to the top story in the refinery, where it is dissolved in hot water and 
filtered. The liquid is then evaporated in vacuum pans, and the sugar 
allowed to crystallize. According to the process employed, we have 
loaf, granulated or powdered sugar. 

BEET SUGAR 

General Statement. — The sugar beet was grown in southern Asia 
before the beginning of the Christian era. It very slowly found its 




Miscellaneous Crops 



247 




way to Europe, and it was not until 1747 that its value was discov^ed. 
Credit for making this discovery belongs to Andreas Marggraf , of Ber- 
lin. In 1801 the first beet-sugar factory was established in Germany, 
but not until 1840 was much progress made in beet-sugar production. 

Distribution. — ^As the sugar beet requires less water and a lower 
temperature than does sugar cane, it has a much wider range. The 
chief beet-sugar-producing coun- 
tries are: Germany, Russia, Aus- 
tria-Hungary, France and the 
United States. In our country 
Colorado, Michigan, California, 
Utah, Idaho, Wisconsin and 
Nebraska are the states most 
important in the growing of 
sugar beets. 

Cultivation and Manufacture. 
— The seed of the beets is 
planted in rows, and the crop, 
which matures in from four to 
six months, is cultivated as are 
ordinary vegetables. The beets 
are dug by machinery, and the 
leaves are then cut off by hand, 
for these contain too much mineral matter to be of value in making 
sugar. From. the fields the beets are carried to the factory by wagon 
or train, according to distance. At the factory each load is weighed 
and then dumped automatically into a stream of water, which carries 
the beets within the building. The beets are tested to ascertain the 
percentage of sugar carried, for upon this the price depends. About 
16 per cent, of the beet by weight is sugar. The beets are sliced and 
soaked in warm water in order to remove the juice. The juice is 
then evaporated and the sugar refined by the same methods as those 
applied to cane sugar. The pulp is used as a food for stock. 

Production. — In the production of beet sugar Germany ranks 
first, her output amounting to about one-third of the world 's supply. 
In 1899 the United States produced about 81,000 short tons of beet 
sugar, while in 1918 about 750,000 tons were produced. In 1918 we 
had about 90 factories in operation. We now produce about one-fifth 
enough beet sugar to supply our entire demand for sugar of all kinds. 
In the semi-arid west, land adapted to the growing of sugar beets 
has rapidly advanced in price. The value of our output of beet sugar 



Fig. 103. — World's production of beet sugar. 
Percentages by countries. 1913-1917 inclusive. 



248 Geography 

has increased more than 800 per cent, since 1899, and amounted in 
1916 to about $75,000,000. 

Much more expensive machinery is required for the cultivation 
and the manufacture of beet sugar than for cane sugar. On the other 
hand, there is less cost for transportation, as a conipiderable part of 
the beet sugar is consumed in sections where it is made. Germany 
has encouraged the cultivation of beet sugar by placing a bounty 
upon it and a tariff on cane sugar. The average yield of sugar beets 
per acre varies from about nine to thirteen tons. It is lowest in 
Michigan, and highest in Utah and Idaho. It has been found that 
the percentage of sugar can be increased by applying proper fertil- 
izers to the soil. The grower of sugar beets frequently works under 
the. direction of the manager of the nearest beet sugar factory. The 
farmer is told when to plant and when to harvest his crop, and if 
he does his work according to directions he has a certain market 
at a specified price. 

Uses. — In addition to its extensive use upon the table, beet sugar 
is employed in the manufacture of candy, chocolate, jelly, jam, and 
in the preserving and canning of fruits. Although beet and cane 
sugar are essentially the same, some maintain that the latter has the 
greater sweetening power. 

MAPLE SUGAR 

General Statement. — In the early history of this country, the 
chief source of the sugar supply was the maple tree. The white man 
found that the Indian understood how to tap the trees and convert 
the sap into sugar, and for a long time the crude methods employed 
by the Indians were improved but little. 

The making of sugar was for a long time a household industry, 
but in time it came to have a commercial importance. Mapile sugar 
did not begin to be shipped to market until about the middle of 
the nineteenth century. Owing to impurities, the product was in 
these early days very dark. 

Manufacture. — ^At the present time the trees are tapped by bor- 
ing an auger hole three-eighths of an inch in diameter and one inch 
in depth. A wood or a metal spout is inserted in the hole, and the 
sap caught in wooden or galvanized iron pails. The sap is gathered 
in a metal tank having a cover, thus insuring cleanliness. In some 
groves the sap is piped to the camp, and in one case at least it is 
carried on a narrow-gauge track. 

The, evaporating is now done in great pans made for the purpose. 



MI8CELLANEOT38 CROPS 249 

They are about six inches deep, forty inches wide, and from ten to 
eighteen feet in length. The pans are divided by partitions into 
a number of compartments. The sap enters at one end, and Sows 
from aide to side through the various compartments, being drawn 
off at the other end in the form of syrup. 

Production. — White the demand for maple sugar haa steaiUly 
increased, the output has not increased, and has since 1890 shown 
a great decrease. This decrease is in part due to a steady decrease 



in the number of maple trees owing to extensive cutting for lumber. 
It is also in part due to the fact that maple sugar is so extensively 
adulterated, that the genuine article does not command a price that 
encourages the producer. "At the very lowest estimate, seven-eighths 
of the product sold today is a spurious article, which is only in part 
maple sugar, or is manufactured entirely from foreign materials." ' 

It is interesting to note that while maple sugar was for a long time 
produced as food, it iA now sold exclusively as a luxury. The demand 
at the present day is due entirely to the peculiar flavor of the sugar. 

'"The Maple Sugar Industiy," Forestry BuUetia No. 50, p. 9. 



250 Oeoorapht 

In 1918 the total value of the maple sugar and syrup produced 
in the United States was more than $10,000,000. The states of 
most importance in the maple sugar industry are Vermont, New 
York, Pennsylvania, Ohio, New Hampshire and Michigan. The 
portion of Canada adjacent to the Great Lakes is a maple sugar- 
producing region. 

A thrifty tree of mature age will produce on the average about 
twelve gallons of sap, or three pounds of sugar, per season. Sap con- 
tains about -three per cent, sugar. There are several varieties of 



FiQ. 106.— Potato 6eld near Greeley, Colorado. (U. S. D. A.) 

The sugar season lasts from about the middle of March to the 
third week in April. The loQgest run on record is 43 days, and the 
shortest 8 days. As the season uBually occurs when the farmer has 
little else to do, the work is more profitable than it otherwise would 
be, A large part of the total output is produced by the farmers. 

POTATOES 

General Statement. — The potato is believed to be a native of 
Chile, South America. It was carried to Europe by the Spaniards 
about 1580. Because of its very extensive use in Ireland, it was in 
comparatively recent years given the name of Irish potato. 

The potato requires a very rich soil, and should not be grown for 



Miscellaneous Crops 251 

more than two years in succession on the same area. Failure to 
observe this is often the cause of a poor crop. As the roots of the 
plant penetrate the soil to a considerable depth, the ground should 
be loose and well drained. A sandy loam is very satisfactory. As a 
result of cultivation, the potato has practically lost the power to 
produce seed, and therefore the farmer plants the potato itself, which 
is an enlarged underground stem. The "eyes" are buds and each 
piece of a potato planted must have one or more eyes. 

Distribution and Production. — ^Although potatoes are widely 
distributed, a few countries produce the bulk of the world 's supply. 
Germany ranks first, with European Russia a close second. 

TABLE 12. 
AvsRAQE Annual Yield for the Five- Year Period Ending with 1914.* 

Country Bushels (round numbers) 

Germany 1,700,000,000 

European Russia •. 1,250,000,000 

Austria-Hungary 660,000,000 ^ 

France 500,000,000 

United States '. 360,000,000 

United Kingdom .{ 260,000,000 

World 5,500,000,000 

TABLE 13. 
Average Yield Per Acre, 1905-1914 Inclusive.' 

Country Bushels 

United States 96 

European Russia 108 (1905-1913) 

Hungary 120 

France 129 

Austria 156 (1905-1913) 

Germany 204 

United Kingdom 213 

Although potatoes are grown on less than one per cent, of the 
cultivated land of the United States, the average crop for the five- 
year period ending with 1918 amounted to 380,000,000 bushels, 
valued at about $360,000,000. This immense amount does not supply 
our demand. For the decade ending with 1915, the value of the crop 
in our country increased 40 per cent. 

'Compiled from figures in Yearbooks, U. S. Dept. of Agriculture. 
'Yearbook, U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, 1916, p. 455. 



252 Geographt 

The potato yields a larger return per acre than do the cereals. 
Germany and France take advantage of this, and export potatoes 
and import wheat. During recent years Germany has established 
many starch factories for the utilization of her potato crop, and she 
manufactures potato flakes and potato flour. 

Through Southampton and Plymouth, Great Britain imports 
potatoes from France. She also receives potatoes from New Zealand. 
As the potato is an excellent keeper, it makes possible long-distance 
shipments by rail and water. The crop can be stored awaiting favor- 




able prices. The digging of the crop by machinery lessens the cost 
of production. 

Food Value. — The potato consists of about 80 per cent, water, 
2 per cent, protein, and 18 per cent, carbohydrates, chiefly starch. 
It is thus an unbalanced diet. Much more nutriment is obtained 
by boiling the potato with the skin on than by peeling it before 
boiling. Allowing the potato to stand in water after peeling decreases 
its value, because some of the mineral salts are dissolved, and there 
is also loss of starch. 

HAY 

In all countries where horses, mules, cattle or sheep are raised 
in lai^ numbers, hay is a very important crop unless the climate 
IB such as to permit the animals to forage successfully at all times of 
the year. Hay is dried grass, wild or cultivated, or less commonly 
it is wheat, barley, or oats cut before the grain has ripened, and fed 



Miscellaneous Crops 



253 



as hay. Owing to the fact that grass grows in nearly all parts of the 
world, and to the great bulk of hay, even when baled, the trade in 
hay is chiefly domestic. 

In the very mountainous parts 
of Germany, Switzerland and 
Austria grass is usually cut by 
hand, for machinery could not 
be employed. In the United 
States the scythe has given 
place to the mowing machine, 
and machines are in conmion use 
upon the European lowlands. 
Where the ground is level, a 
mowing machine will cut from 
eight to ten acres per day. 

For the five-year period end- 
ing with 1918 the average annual 
hay crop in the United States 
amounted to about 81,000,000 tons, valued on the farm at about 
$1,000,000,000. In our country hay generally ranks second in value 
among the crops. It is less expensive to produce than are most crops. 




Fia. 108. — Production of hay in United States. 
Percentage by states. 1914-1918 inclusive. 



TABLE 14. 

AvEBAOB Annual Ydsld op Hay for the Five-Ybar Pbjriod Ending with 

1915.^ 

Tons (figures in 
State round numbers) 

New York 5,700,000 

Iowa , 4,450,000 

Pennsylvania 4,200,000 

Wisconsin 4,000,000 

Ohio 3,501,000 

California 3,500,000 

Michigan 3,000,000 

United States 69,000,000 

All of the states named are important dairy states, and in most 
of them there are large cities where thousands of horses and mules 
are used. 

* From Yearbooks, U. S. Department of Agriculture. 



TOBACCO 

The cultivation of tobacco was quite closely connected with the 
early history of our country. The plant Js native of America, and at 



ceo field. (O. S. D. A.) 



the time of the discovery of our continent it was in general use among 
the Indians. It was early introduced into Europe, and its use rapidly 
spread to all parts of the world. 




In the tobacco fields of Virginia slaves found their first employ- 
ment in this country. As the crop rapidly exhausts the fertility of 
the soil, plantations were used for a very few years and then aban- 
doned for new areas. This was possible because land had so little value. 



Miscellaneous Crops 255 

The large plantations meant sparse population and poor roads. 
Tobacco was the one great crop in Virginia. As early as 1689 this 
colony was exporting 8,000 tons per year to the mother country. 
On account of the scarcity of money, tobacco was accepted in pay- 
ment of salaries, taxes and debts of all kinds. 

The " Navigation Act, " passed by the English Parliament in 1660, 
was a serious blow to the tobacco planters. It provided that various 
commodities, among them tobacco, could be exported to England 
only, and in ships owned and navigated by Englishmen. 

TABLE 15. 
Average Anntjal Yield of Tobacco for the Five- Year Period Ending 

WITH 1914.5 '* 

' , Country Pounds (round numbers) Rank 

Unii^. States 987,000,000 1 

.^ British India 450,000,000 2 

European Russia 218,444,000 3 

Hungary 154,815,000 4 

Java ./. 107,598,000 5 

Japan ...,/. 93,129,000 6 

World . . ,, 2,668,623,000 

■ . . * 

Other countries of considerable importance in the production 
of tobacco ares Germany, European Turkey, the Philippine Islands 
and Cuba. As is shown by Table 16, Kentucky is the leading pro- 
ducer in our country, and Louisville is the greatest tobacco market 
in the United States. Fine Sumatra tobacco is nov/ grown in the 
Connecticut vabUeyJ where fields sometimes several acres in extent 
are protected fey awnings and walls of cloth. The annual tcJbac^ 
crop m the United States is worth about $100,000,000. 

^v, ' TABLE 16. . 

Average Annual Yield op Tobacco for the Five- Year Period Ending 

WITH 1914.^ 
State Pounds (round numbers) Rank 

Kentucky 340,000,000 1 

North Carolina 150,000,000 2 

Virginia 130,00Q,000 3 

Ohio 75,000,000 4 

Tennessee 65,000,000 5 

Pennsylvania 52,000,000 6 

Wisconsin 45,000,000 7 

United States 900,000,000 

^Yearbooks, U. S. Department of Agriculture. 



Although we produce lai^e quantities of hops, we import some 
from European countries. The largest growers of hoils are the United 
States, Austria-Hungary, Germany and England. For many years 
hop-growing was practically confined to Central New York State. 
Washington, Oregon and California are now important. 



Fio. 112.— PinkinK hop*. 

The hop plant is usually propagated from cuttings. As the roots 
penetrate the ground to a depth of several feet, a well-drained sub- 
soil is essential. The plants are set out six to eight feet apart each 
way. Wires fastened to the tops of posts are stretched over the fields, 
and strings conduct the plants to the wires 

As the hops when harvested contain a very high percentage 
of moisture, they must be dried before they can be with safety stored. 
Artificial heat is sometimes employed for this purpose. 



MiscELLANBOtis Crops 287 

The chief use of hops is in the manufacture of malt drinks. The 
most important hop-producing countries were formerly the leading 
countries in the manufacture of beer, 

COCOANUTS 

The cocoanut palm grows in tropical regions only, and usually 
quite close to the coast. The tree is very graceful, terminating in a 



Fia. 113.— CocoanuC trees, Tahiti. Courtesy L. F. Cockrott. 

crown of drooping, feathery leaves, each one of which is from ten to 
fifteen feet in length. In some cases this crown is 80 or even 100 
feet above the ground. 

A cocoanut plantation is started by planting the nuts in a nursery 
and later transplanting the young trees. A full crop, which is not 
secured for perhaps fifteen years after planting the trees, consists 
of 100 to 200 nuts per tree. The nuts grow in clusters, and are har- 
vested by climbing the trees and cutting the nuts from the stems. 

When unripe the nuts contain a jelly-like substance, in which 
there is a liquid sometimes called cocoanut milk. As the nut ripens 
this material hardens. When dried the kernel is known as copra. 



258 Geography 

From the ripe kernel cocoanut oil is obtained. This is used for 
cooking, for illumination, in the manufacture of soap and candles, 
and by the natives of the islands where the tree grows for anointing 
the body. 

The trunks of the trees are used in the construction of houses, 
the leaves for thatching and for the manufacture of baskets and fans, 
the shells for utensils of many kinds, the bark for tanning, the roots 
for medicine, and the terminal bud is eaten as a vegetable. A coarse 
brown sugar, an intoxicating liquor, and matting, brushes and ropes 
are other commodities derived from the cocoanut palm. 

To the people of the South Pacific Islands this tree is almost 
indispensable. The cocoanut is the chief source of wealth to the 
inhabitants of the Samoan Islands. The Hawaiian Islands, the 
Philippine Islands, the West Indies, Central America, and Colombia 
are other areas where the cocoanut tree flourishes. Some cocoanuts 
are produced in Florida. 

PEANUTS 

We are so accustomed to seeing peanuts sold in five-cent packages 
that it is difficult to reaUze the value of the crop. During the decade 
ending in 1909 the acreage devoted to this crop in the United States 
increased 68 per cent, and the yield increased 62 per cent. This 
remarkable increase is due to the fact that in a measure the peanut 
has come to take the place of cotton as a crop, to the manufacture 
of peanut oil, peanut butter and peanut confections, and to the intro- 
duction of machinery in digging and picking the crop. 

In 1918 we produced more than 50,000,000 bushels, the value 
of which was more than $95,000,000. In addition to this enormous 
amount we imported a large quantity. Table 17 shows the yield in 
round nupabers in the chief peanut-growing states in 1918.® 

TABLE 17. 

State Bushels 

Alabama 17,000,000 

Georgia 10,000,000 

North Carolina 7,000,000 

Texas 7,000,000 

Virginia 6,000,000 

Florida 5,000,000 

Tennessee 700,000 



6 



Yearbook, U. S. Department of Agriculture, 1918, p. 562. 



Miscellaneous Chops 260 

The peanut is grown extensively in western Africa, China, Japan, 
East Indies, Brazil, Spain and other semitropieal regions. For its 
successful cultivation the plant requires a climate that is free from 
frost for a period of five months. The best soil is a sandy loam 
containing. considerable lime. 

In European countries much peanut oil is manufactured, and it 



is used as is olive oil, which it is said to equal, although it is much 
cheaper. The price ranges from fifty cents to one dollar per gallon. 
The city of Marseilles manufactures this oil extensively. 

As the peanut contains about 29 per cent, of protein, 14 per cent, 
of carbohydrates, and 49 per cent, of fat, its value as a food is evident. 
From broken and low-grade nuts,peanut meal, a valuable cattle food, 
ismade. Thevincsarefedtocattle. They make an excellent fertilizer 
because they contain nitrogen, phosphoric acid and potash. If the 
entire crop is removed from the soil it rapidly exhausts its fertiUty. 

The peanut is not a nut, but it is popularly so regarded. In 
reahty it is a ground pea. It is an annual, and produces its fruit 
underground. Because it has the ability to take nitrogen from the 
atmosphere) it is sometimes grown for the purpose of enriching the soil . 



260 Geogkaphy 



STUDIES 



Is the demand for hay increasing or diminishing? What special advantage 
in the potato as a farm crop? Is the importation of sugar by the United States 
likely to increase? From a study of the temperature and rainfall charts of the 
United States, determine the temperature and moisture conditions required by 
sugar cane. Compare the value of our annual tobacco crop with that of our 
annual output of gold. Why are nuts valuable as a food? Are nuts as ordinarily 
used in this country economical as a food? Are nuts produced extensively 
in your state? 

REFERENCES 

Anderson, Esther S. : "Sugar- Beet Production in Nebraska." Jowr. of Geog., 

vol. xix, p. 121 Apr. 1920. 
"Beet-Sugar Industry," Jour, of Geog.j vol. xii, p. 25. 
Handy, R. B.: "Peanuts: Culture and Uses." U. S. Dept. of Agri., Farmers' 

Bull. No. 25. 
Martineau, G.: "Sugar." 

"Potato Culture in Germany." Jour, of Geog., vol. ii, p. 424. 
TowNSEND, C. O.: "The ft-esent Status of the Sugar-beet Industry in the 

United States." Yearbook U. S. Dept. of AgH,, 1916, p. 399. 
Van Cleef, Eugene: "The Sugar-Beet Industry in Germany, With Special 

Attention to Chmate." BvU. Am. Geog. Soc.j vol. xlvii, pp. 241, 334. 
ViNAL, W. G.: "The Potato: A Study in Plant Geography." Jour, of Geog., 

vol. xviii, p. 325. Dec. 1919. 
Yearbooks, U. S. Dept. of Agriculture. 



PART THREE 

THE FORESTS AND MAN 

CHAPTER XXni 
Forests and Forestry 

General Statement. — **If there is any one duty which more than 
another we owe to our children and our children's children to 
perform at once, it is to save the forests of this country, for they con- 
stitute the first and most important element in the conservation 
of the natural resources of the country/'^ 

From the dim past, when our ancestors were tree-dwellers, to 
the present day, forests have been intimately related to the welfare 
of man. The houses in which we live, the furniture which they con- 
tain, the vehicles and ships in which we travel, are made in part from 
forest trees. From the forests are derived certain foods, as well as 
materials which enter into the manufacture of clothing. The papers, 
magazines and books that we read have, in many cases, been made 
from spruce or hemlock trees. From the forests is obtained much 
fuel, the material used in making cross-ties, telegraph and telephone 
poles, fence-posts, mine supports, boxes, barrels, farming tools and 
machinery, matches, pencils, spools and countless other things in 
daily use. Forests are of inestimable value in regulating stream-flow, 
thus conserving the water supply and lessening floods. This has an 
appUcation to irrigation, navigation, the development of power, the 
removal of soil, as well as loss of property and life. Trees add a 
charm to the home and the street; they beautify the landscape, and 
they weave their influence into the spiritual as well as the material 
life of man. Each summer thousands of persons seek the forests in 
search of recreation, health or pleasure. 

There are thus many reasons why we should study the forests. 
We should know their distribution, and upon what this depends. 
We should understand how to make them of the most use in supply- 
ing materials for various purposes. We should learn how they may 
serve to check the removal of soil from the slopes, and the destruction 
of property and life wrought by floods. We should study the preven- 
tion and control of forest fires which cause great losses annually. We 
should not only conserve and scientifically handle existing forests; 

^Roosevelt, Theodore: "Message to Congress, Dec. 8, 1908." 

261 



262 Geography 

we should extend the timber-land by planting trees on available tracts. 

Distribution.—r-Temperature and precipitation are the keys to the 
natural distribution of forests. Generally speaking, natural tree 
growth is not abundant in regions where the average summer tem- 
perature is less than 50° F., and the average annual precipitation is 
less than 20 inches. The seepage of water sometimes accounts for 
the extension of forest areas into sections where the yearly precipita- 
tion falls short of this, however. 

In the tropical forests of Central America, South America, Africa 
and southern Asia are found the various palms, the banana, the 
banyan, the rubber, the mahogany, rosewood and many other kinds 
of trees. In the gloomy depths of these forests the white man finds 
no congenial home, although he draws from them much wealth. 

On the poleward sides of the tropics are the temperate latitude 
forests. These may be divided into coniferous and deciduous. The 
cone-bearing trees occupy high altitudes and latitudes, while the 
deciduous trees are found at lower levels and latitudes. The 
economic importance of the temperate latitude forests is far greater 
than is that of the forests of the tropical zone. 

In the Old World, Russia contains the greatest forest area. Thirty- 
six per cent, of European Russia is classed as timber-land, an area equal 
to four times the area of France. In addition, there are vast forests 
in Siberia. Austria-Hungary, Norway, Sweden, Germany, Rumania 
and France have extensive forest areas. 

In the United States there are five important forest areas: the 
New England, the Lake region, the Southern section, the Rocky 
Mountain section, and the Pacific Coast States. Washington, Oregon, 
Idaho and California contain about five-elevenths of the standing 
timber in our country. Our total forest area is about 550,000,000 
acres, or 18 per cent, of our land area. 

Forests and Floods. — A forest cover is of the greatest importance 
in regulating stream-flow. The underbrush, vines, creepers, ferns, 
grass and vegetable mould combine to form a veritable sponge which 
prevents rapid run-oflf. Under these conditions the water slowly 
seeps through the soil and works its way to the streams. The rills 
and small streams, being fed slowly and constantly, are not subject 
to flood, and are permanent rather than intermittent in their flow. 

A study of the relations between forests and run-ofiF was made 
in the San Bernardino Mountains of southern California.^ Three 

^James W. Tourney, Collaborator, Bureau of Forestry: "The Relation of 
Forests to Stream-Flow." Yearbook of Dept. of Agriculture, 1903, pp. 286-287. 



FOKESTO AND FORESTRY ^3 

basios having Bimilar topography and varying in area from one-half 
to one and one-half square milea were chosen. The smallest of the 
three basins was non-forested, but the others were forested. The 
rainfall in the non-forested basin was much less than that in the for- 
ested basins, and the run-off was much more rapid. 

Since sunshine is to some extent excluded from a forest, and the 
wind cut off, the removal of snow both through melting and evapora^ 
tion is checked. In non-forested regions the rapid removal of snow 



Fio. 115.— Map of United SUtea. ghovins tinib«r mil prairie areas. Unshaded u-ea. 

Prairie. Darli ehade in Nnrtheast and North. Centra] (oreiU. Lighter ihadtd area io South- 

awt. Soutbem forHta. V«ry liihtJy ahaded area, Kocky MounUina (oreats. Deep ahade, 

PaciBc Coast forests. (Graves, L'. 8. D. A. Forest Service.) 

is often the cause of floods. When streams are in flood they carry 
great loads of rock waste. When the streams bearing their loads 
of boulders, gravel, sand and mud pass from steep to very gentle 
slopes, their velocity is checked, carrying-power diminished, and the 
material deposited. As a result, large areas are sometimes rendered 
unfit for agriculture. 

Our country ia so young, its resources so vast, and its population 
so sparse, that we are but beginning to realize the danger that threatens 
us as a result of the removal of our forests. In the upland districts 
of the South much damage has been done as a result of the removal 
of timber from the Appalachian Mountains, 

Forests as regulators of stream-flow are of vital importance in 



264 Geography 

France, because she has so many torrents. Originating in the Pjrrepees, 
Alps and Cevennes are 1,462 streams classed as dangerous. Nearly 
a million acres of mountain slope and much level land are exposed 
to the work of these streams. As early as the sixteenth century local 
restrictions preserved the mountain sides from deforestation, but 
these restrictions were entirely disregarded during the time of the 
French Revolution. '^ Where useful brooks had been there now 
rushed torrents which flooded the fertile fields and covered them 
with sterile soil washed down from the mountains. The clearing 
continued unchecked until some 800,000 acres of farm land had been 
ruined or seriously injured, and the population of eighteen depart- 
ments had been reduced to poverty and forced to emigrate.''^ 

In 1860 the state undertook the establishment of protection 
forests. A fa'w passed in 1882 provides that the government shall 
bear all of the expense. So fully are the people in sympathy with the 
movement that much mountain land has been given to the Forest 
Department, and the state purchases considerable areas each year. 
More than 500,000 acres have been acquired, over one-half of which 
have been planted. * Since 1882 one hundred and sixty-three torrents 
have been placed under complete and 654 under partial control. 

In the mountainous districts of France, Switzerland, Austria and 
other European countries one sees the banks of even the small 
streams protected by a sort of woven mat of poles and twigs held in 
place by poles driven into the ground. In Spain and Italy streams 
have done much damage as a result of removing the forests. China 
has suffered irreparable loss. Soil has been removed, the water- 
table lowered, and property and life lost because of floods. 

Because forests regulate stream-flow, they are of great value to 
agricultural lands, and to irrigated lands in particular. The clearing of 
timber from the slopes renders rivers less navigable, not only because 
of decreased flow, but also because of the choking of the streams 
with rock waste. The water-power available for manufacturing is 
very unequally distributed as to time, and industry is retarded. 

Forests and Sand Dunes. — Forests check the removal of the 
soil by the winds as well as by water. In 1793 France commenced 
the planting of trees on the dunes along her western coast. These 
ridges of sand the winds were slowly driving landward, destroying 
valuable vineyards as they went. The migration of the dunes has 
been stopped, and the forests growing upon them yield crops of wood 

^Treadwell, Cleveland, Jr.: "What Forestry Has Done." Forest Service 
Circular 140. 



Forests and Forestry 265 

and rfisin. Farther inland, in the region known as the Laudes, both 
sand and swamp lands have been reclaimed. 

The city of Frovincetown, on Cape Cod, which is extensively- 
engaged in lishing and shipping, has, together with its harbor, 
suffered much because of shifting sands. Within historic times 
considerable areas now covered by dunes were forested. The timber 
was removed, to be used as fuel and in building houses and ships, and 



Fia. 116. — A wdl-inan»ged woodlot. 

much was destroyed because of the pitch and turpentine industry. 
As a result of this deforestation, the dunes encroached upon the 
city so that "la^e amounts of sand were artificially removed to 
prevent the burial of houses. ' ' That part of the bay known as East 
Harbor was completely destroyed, and only a fresh-water marsh 
marks its former location. For 150 years beach grass has been planted 
to check the movement of the sands, and while this has done much, 
reforestation is now looked to as the only solution of the difficulty. 
The magnitude of the work is shown by the statement that "the 
General Government has spent to June 30, 1903, the sum of 



266 Geography 

$162,019.86 for the protection of the harbor." In addition, the state 
has spent large sums. 

Forests and Rainfall. — There has long been a widespread belief 
that forests induce rainfall. To a considerable extent, at least, the 
result has been mistaken for the cause. Primarily, vegetation exists 
because of favorable climatic conditions, not climatic conditions 
because of vegetation. 

Precipitation is caused by the cooling of the atmosphere, which 
increases its humidity to the point of saturation. This lowering of 
temperature comes ^bout in three ways: 

1. In the doldrums the air is constantly rising to great altitudes; 
hence in this belt rains are of daily occurrence. 

2. When an air current comes in contact with a mountain range 
it is forced to rise, and rain is likely to occur on the windward side. 

3. On the forward side of the great cyclonic areas which move 
across the temperate zones in a general easterly direction, conditions 
are favorable for precipitation, for here the air is moving from areas 
of higher to areas of lower temperatures. In view of these points 
we may ask whether forests have any effect upon rainfall. 

Within a forest the summer tem_perature is slightly lower than 
it is in the. adjacent non-forested areas. The trees retard the move- 
ments of the atmosphere. The process of evaporation is therefore 
checked. Through transpiration every large tree is returning annually 
many tons of moisture to the air, which, because of the low rate of 
evaporation, increases the relative humidity. It would therefore 
appear that the forests have a tendency to increase precipitation, for 
the air within a forest might reach the saturation point, while the air 
in adjacent non-forested areas would be above this point. Any 
increase in precipitation resulting from forests would no doubt be 
very local in character. 

In order to decide on the extent to which forests influence rain- 
fall, accurate records covering large areas and many years are neces- 
sary. These records should apply: 

1. To areas formerly forested, but now devoid of timber. 

2. To areas formerly treeless, but now having a forest cover. 

3. To areas where all but forest conditions are as nearly identical 
as possible. 

Such studies of this problem as have been made in both the Old 
and New Worlds vary in results. In Bavaria, India and the United 
States the excess of rainfall in the forested areas is very slight. In 
some cases there is apparently no excess. 



Forests and Forestry 267 

Studies in France and Russia show that in some cases the rainfall 
in forested areas is no greater than in that of adjoining areas not for- 
ested, while in other cases the excess amounts to 43 per cent. Many 
of the leading meteorologists in our country and in Europe believe 
that forests have little influence upon rainfall. It might be repeated 
at this point that the forest cover conserves the water supply, and 
is thus of inestimable value. 

Reforestation. — In the early periods of the history of this coun- 
try our forests seemed inexhaustible. They were, in fact, an obstacle 
to development. The pioneer was obliged to cut and bum the timber 
and grub out the stumps before he could cultivate his land and raise 
crops. For a long time the forests of New England met all local 
demands, and furnished much timber for exportation. The marvelous 
development of this country, and the constant European demand, 
drew in time upon the white pine resource of the Lake region. Later 
the yellow pine belt of the South was invaded. Today the forests 
of the Pacific Slope are being rapidly felled. We are now cutting 
annually about three times as much timber as grows during the same 
period, hence the outcome is perfectly evident. In addition, the loss 
of our forests means a failing water supply and agricultural lands 
turned into desert wastes. 

It is obvious that it is a difficult matter to induce individuals 
to handle their forest possessions in such a way as to make for the 
interests of future generations. The necessity of placing forest 
areas under government control is therefore apparent. On March 3, 
1891, Congress authorized the President to '^set apart and reserve, 
in any state or territory having public lands bearing forests, any part 
of the public lands wholly or in part covered with timber, or under- 
growth, whether of commercial value or not, as public reservations. '^ 
In the same year President Harrison created the first — the Yellow- 
stone National Forest. On Washington's Birthday, 1897, President 
Cleveland set aside thirteen areas as national forests — ^a most fitting 
celebration of a great day. There were in the United States on June 30, 
1917, 152 national forests, with a total areaof about 155,000,000 acres. 

Within the national forests there are small tracts of agricultural 
land. These are open to settlement in the ordinary way. Mineral 
lands may also be filed upon and developed. Such timber as is re- 
quired by the actual home maker is given him. It is also given to com- 
munities when required for public purposes. Others must purchase. 
Twenty-five per cent, of the amount derived from the sale of the tim- 
ber is applied to county, school and road funds in the states in which 



268 Geography 

the national forests are located, provided that this amount shall in 
no case exceed 40 per cent, of the total tax in such counties. The 
government allows the owners of stock to graze their animals in the 
forests, a low rental being required for this privilege. Our forest 
policy, as established by the Act of June 4, 1897, is as follows: "To 
improve and protect the forest within the reservation, or for the 
purpose of securing favorable conditions of water flow, and to 
furnish a continuous supply of timber for the use and necessities of 
citizens of the United States; but it is not the purpose or intent of 
these provisions, or of the act providing for such reservations, to 
authorize the inclusion therein of lands more valuable for the mineral 
therein, or for agricultural purposes, than for forest purposes." 

The construction of roads, trails, telephone lines, bridges, cabins 
and fire-breaks, the planting of trees and seeds, the fighting of fire 
and the care of the forest generally, requires a large force of men 
trained in woodcraft. These men are selected from those who have 
passed a Civil Service examination. In 1919 there were some 5,000 
persons in the employ of the Forest Service. 

Cost and Returns. — For the year ending June 30, 1916, the 
appropriation amounted to about $5,500,000. During the year 1918 
the sum of $1,619,369 was derived from the sale of timber from 
the national forests, and the revenue from all sources amounted 
to $3,574,930. 

Through the prevention and fighting of fires the Forest Service 
saves large sums annually. These fires are in many cases the result 
of carelessness on the part of hunters, campers and others. In the 
summer of 1902 fires raging in Washington and Oregon for nine days 
destroyed timber valued at $12,000,000. During the calendar year 
1910 fires in the national forests caused a loss of $25,000,000. 
It is not simply the mature timber that is lost, in such cases, but the 
young growth and the underbrush as well. 

"It has been shown that one-eleventh of all the forests are swept 
by fires every year, and that on the average since 1870, forest fires 
have yearly cost $50,000,000 and 50 lives."^ Owing to the extension 
of trails, . roads, fire-breaks and telephone lines, as well as to 
greater care on the part of the public, forest fires do much less damage 
now than formerly. Each ranger patrols on the average 121,506 acres. 

Reforestation is chiefly a matter of benefit to future generations. 
Irving said, "He who plants an oak looks forward to future ages and 

* " The Status of Forestry in the U. S." Forest Circular 167, p. 3. 



FORKSTS AND FoRKSTRY 268 

plants for posterity. Nothing can be iesa selfish than this." The 
same may be said of the planting of trees upon our mountain slopes. 
The trees are raised from seeds at nurseries in the forest, and are 
transplanted by rangers. During 1916 seeds were sown on 2,803 
acres, and trees were planted on 71593 acres. In humid regions the 
sowing of seeds in the forest has produced satisfactory results. 
Practically every civilized nation practices forestry. China, so long 



inactive on this line, has made a beginning. European countries 
are far ahead of us, for with them forestry is well established, and its 
value is clearly seen. A century and a half ago Germany began to 
feel the effects of a timber shortage, and to realize the loss to agricul- 
ture from the removal of the forests. This led to the development 
of a Forest Service, which has been so scientifically handled that in 
1904 the net returns from the forests of Prussia were $2.50 per acre, 
while the output of timber is steadily increasing. In the Black Forest 
the income from the trees is more than sufiicient for the maintenance 
of the splendid system of roads. 

The Republic of Switzerland expends from SI. 50 to $7.00 per 
acre annually upon her forests, and receives a net profit of from 
S3. 00 to $12.00 per acre yearly. The law requires that logged areas 
must be replanted within three years from the time of the cutting. 

The area' on the northeast shore of the Adriatic, and known as the 



270 Gboqrapry 

"Karst, " furnished Venice with timber for centuries. The clearing of 
the land reduced thi» region to an almost worthless condition. Since 
1865, 400,000 acres in this district have been planted to forest trees. 
Russia, although stiU having vast forest areas, began the work of 
forestry long ago. The liberation of the serfs in 1861 temporarily 
checked the handling of the forests. The government now owns 
79 per cent, of the forest area. Forests which prevent the migration 



of sands, regulate the stream-flow, or hinder avalanches are classed 
as "Protection Forests" and may not be cleared. In order to en- 
courage tree-planting on private holdings the govemraent distributes 
seedlings free of cost. The net income from the government forests 
averages about three and one-fifth cents per acre. In Finland the 
cutting of trees that measure less than ten inches in diameter at 
a height of 25 feet from the ground is prohibited, and not more than 
twelve acres may be cut without preparing for a new growth. 

Italy and Spain have suffered severely as a result of the removal 
of forests. Streams which were formerly permanent are now dry 
during the summer months. In 1897 a flood near the city of Bologna 
did damage to the extent of $1,000,000. No nation has sustained 
a greater loss as a result of deforestation than has China. Northern 



Forests and Forestry 271 

China has practically no timber. Erosion has worked rapidly upon 
the denuded slopes, soil has been washed away, and floods have 
wrought tremendous havoc. Extensive areas which once supported 
a dense population are now practically deserts. 

Consul Ernest L. Harris, of Smyrna, Turkey, says of the results 
of deforestation in that land: "The disappearance of the forests 
in this country, especially in the vilayet of Smyrna, has been marked 
by greater degrees of heat and cold. The date palm has practically 
become extinct in these parts. In the winter and spring there are 
usually floods, which are destructive to life, property and crops. 
In the summer there is not sufficient moisture in the soil of many 
districts, for the reason that the rain passes away at once down 
woodless ravines, without being absorbed by the ground. As a result 
large tracts have become sterile. Creeks and brooks which formerly 
retained considerable water, even in the heat of summer, are now 
completely dried up a few weeks after the spring rains."* 

Forestry is a subject in which our own and every enlightened 
nation is today deeply interested. The conservation of our forest 
resource, and the reforesting of denuded areas, are matters which 
concern the welfare of every resident of our land. The waste of 
national wealth means loss to every man, woman and child, just as 
truly as the loss of the possessions of a family means suffering to 
every member of that family. 

In 300 years we have brought an inheritance which seemed 
absolutely inexhaustible to the point where poverty faces us. There 
are men now living who have seen valuable timber burned in order 
to clear the land. They have seen the best of walnut and maple used 
for fuel, and yet, according to our highest authorities, our supply 
will, at the present rate of consimiption, last but a comparatively 
short time. 

In wasting our forests we have suffered great loss in other ways. 
The streams, unrestrained because of the removal of the forest cover, 
have swept vast quantities of fertile soil from the land, thus lessening 
productivity. This is painfully apparent in many districts in the 
South. This soil, after choking rivers and harbors to the detriment 
of navigation, is dredged out at great cost. Floods have increased, 
and annually cause much loss in city as well as in country. The water- 
table has been lowered, thus adding to the cost of raising the water 
to the surface. Water-powers are threatened, and this is striking 
at one of our greatest resources. 

"HUonsular Reports, May, 1908, p. 182. 



272 Geography 

If we would profit by the experience of China, Turkey, Greece, 
Italy, Spain and France, our Forest Service must receive abundant 
support, and individuals must cooperate by exercising the greatest 
care to prevent forest destruction by fire and other means. 

Only by prompt, vigorous, intelligent action shall we be able to 
trajisfer even a small part of our vast inheritance to those who are 
to come after us, and who must suffer great loss if we continue un- 
faithful to our trust. 

STUDIES 

Are there any national forests in your state? Locate them. How may each 
individual help to conserve our timber supply? Is government ownership of 
the forests desirable? Why? Why is forestry in New Mexico more of a problem 
than it is in Maine? Why do European countries derive more profit per acre 
from their forests than do we? 

REFERENCES 

Bowman, Isaiah: ** Forest Ph3^iography." 

Chamberlain, A. H. and J. F.: "Thrift and Conservation," chapter xiv. 

Chamberlain, James F.: "Our Forests: A Wasted Inheritance." Jour, of 
Geog., 8 : 145. 

Cleveland, Jr., Treadwell: **What Forestry Has Done." Forest Service 
Circular 140, 1908. 

Laurier, Sir Wilfrid: "The Forests of Canada." Nat. Geog. Mag., vol. xvii, 
p. 504. 

Merrill, O. C: "Opening Up the National Forests by Road-Building." Year- 
hook U. S. Dept. of Agri.f 1916, p. 521. 

"Reforestation in the National Forests." Forest Service Bull. 98, 1911. 

"The Country's Forests." Forest Service, 1914. 

"The Drain Upon the Forests." Forest Service Circular 129, 1907. 

"The Forest Resources of the World." Forest Service Bull. 83. 

"The Waning Hardwood Supply." Forest Service Circular 116, 1907. 

Van Hise, Charles R.: "The Conservation of Natural Resources in the United 
States," p. 208. 



CHAPTER XXIV 
Forest Products 

LUMBER 

General Statement. — ^When the white man landed upon the 
shores of America, and indeed as late as one hundred years ago, the 
forests of this country seemed inexhaustible. Before the settler 
could plow the ground he had to clear it of trees, and then dig out 
the stumps. This was a task requiring much hard labor. What 
was in the boyhood days of Abraham Lincoln a serious hindrance 
to the development of many sections of the United States has now 
become one of our most valuable, and at the same time rapidly dis- 
appearing, resources. 

Our experience simply repeats that of many countries in the Old 
World. England, once forest-covered, has now little timber. . Italy, 
Spain, France, Germany, Austria have suffered serious losses. China 
is almost destitute of trees. A country bountifully supplied with 
timber has an important source of national prosperity, while one 
deficient in this respect is dependent upon others for a commodity 
of great importance. 

Distribution of Lumber. — A few nations supply the world with 
lumber. The most important of these are: Russia, including Finland, 
Norway, Sweden, Austria-Hungary, India, Canada and the United 
States. In European Russia there are about 444,000,000 acres of 
forest land, or 36 percent, of the total area, and in Siberia 350,000,000 
acres more. Russia exports some $30,000,000 worth of forest pro- 
ducts per year, and tremendous quantities of lumber and fuel are 
used at home. About 48 per cent, of Sweden is forest-covered, and 
both she and Norway are heavy exporters of lumber. Austria and 
Hungary are exporters, but Germany, although having vast forests, 
is not able to supply her demand for lumber. Great Britain, France, 
Switzerland, Spain and Italy all import lumber. 

Canada has vast forests and a small population. In British 
Columbia, where the temperature is moderate and the precipitation 
abundant, tree growth is magnificent. Here the red fir, red and yellow 
cedar, western spruce, hemlock and other trees abound. This timber 

18 273 



274 Geographt 

belt stretches from the forty-ninth to the sixtieth parallel, and is two 
or three hundred miles in width. In northern Canada there is a 
still more extensive forest. This belt extends from the east coast 
of Labrador to Alaska. The dimensions of this forest, which is lai^ly 
of spruce, are roughly 3,000 miles from east to west, and 500 miles 
from north to south. The southern Canadian belt is located in 



FiQ. 119.— MBrkingtimbertobeDut[naBBleinaofttioDat forat in the-Southneet. (0.8. D, A.> 

Ontario and Quebec. As this forest is situated so close to the great 
manufacturing centers of the United States, it is of great value to us. 

The extent of forest land in the United States is estimated 
at 550,000,000 acres, or 18 per cent, of our total area. There 
are five forest belts: the New England, the Lake States, the 
Southern States, the Rocky Mountain States, and the Pacific 
Coast States. 

From our Atlantic seaboard, lumber is exported to European 
markets, while from Bellingham, Everett, Tacoma, Seattle, Portland 
and San Francisco lumber is sent to South America, Australia and 
the Orient. 

Operation. — Felling the forest trees, transporting them to saw- 



Forest Products 27S 

mills, and cutting them into boards and other commercial forms, is 
known as lumbering. This industry is in iteelf of great importance, 
and it gives rise to many others of much economic value. These 



various industries employ in the United States about 500,000 persons 
and have an invested capital of more than $1,000,000,000. The 
value of the output of the forest products in this country is more than 
$1,000,000,000 annually. 

In the New England and the Lake States most of the timber is cut 
during the winter, partly because it is easier and cheaper to move 



276 



Geography 



the logs on sleds than on wagons, and in part to have the logs ready 
to float down the streams with the spring freshets. The cost of the 
transportation within the forest is reduced by having roadbeds of 
ice. These are made by sprinkling the roads and allowing the water 
to freeze. 

The logs, marked with the owner's sign, are hauled to the banks 
of the streams, and with the coming of high water ^ driven'' to the 
saw-mills, which are often located where water-power is available. 
Bangor, Auburn, Lewiston, Augusta and St. Paul are important saw- 
mill centers. 

From the Lake region great quantities of lumber are sent by boat, 
the Great Lakes affording cheap transportation^ and this, together 
with the fact that this region still produces 15 per cent, of our total 
cut of lumber, accounts for the location of the great lumber distribut- 
ing and wood-working centers, such as Duluth, Chicago, Cleveland, 
Erie, Tonawanda, Grand Rapids and Saginaw. 

On the Pacific Coast machinery is extensively used in lumbering. 
When the lumber camps are far from a railroad and the mills are 
close at hand, the sawed product is sometimes flumed to the nearest 
railroad point. The flumes, wooden channels in which streams of 
water flow, are in some cases 50 to 60 miles in length. Slides are much 
employed in getting the logs to train and mill. Light stationary en- 
gines, known as donkey-engines, drag the logs to the heads of the 
slides. Here they are made into trains and hauled down by heavier 
engines situated at the bottom. In California, as well as in western 
Oregon and Washington, there are many mills capable of cutting 
100,000 board feet per day. 

Production. — Both production and consumption of lumber have 
been rapidly increasing in this country. 

TABLE 18. 

9 

Lumber Cut op the United States, 1880-1916, in Round Numbers. 

1880 18,000,000,000 board feet 

1890 23,500,000,000 

1900 34,700,000,000 

1910 40,000,000,000 

1911 37,000,000,000 

1912 39,000,000,000 

1913 38,000,000,000 

1914 37,000,000,000 

1915 37,000,000,000 

1916 39,000,000,000 



Forest Products 277 

In 1910 we were using 260 cubic feet of wood per capita yearly. 
The lumber cut has increased more than 100 per cent, since 1880. 
In Europe the annual consumption averages about 50 cubic feet 
per capita. 

New England was originally almost entirely forest-covered. 
She possesses numerous streams down which timber can be floated. 
In these streams there are many falls, thus making available cheap 
power for sawing. These conditions, together with the numerous in- 
dentations along the coast, and the opportunities for fishing off 
shore, led to shipbuilding. The surface features of the area dis- 
courage agriculture on a large scale. For all of these reasons lumber- 
ing early assumed much importance in New England. 

The growing demand for lumber at home, as well as the European 
market, caused a heavy drain upon the forest, the margin of which 
was steadily pushed back from the eastern coast. About the year 
1870 the supremacy of tnis region as a producer of lumber passed to 
the group of states around the Great Lakes. This section was heavily 
timbered, the path which the center of population has followed in 
its westward movement crosses the southern part of it, and the Great 
Lakes furnish an unsurpassed waterway for the shipment of the 
lumber. This waterway, the vast mineral resource of the lake 
district, and the fertile prairies to the south combined t.o develop 
great centers of population on and near the shores of the lakes. 
A large demand for lumber in its various forms was thus created. 
Chicago became the greatest lumber market in the world, and a 
consumer of vast quantities of wood in the manufacture of vehicles 
and farming implements. 

TABLE 19. 

Geographical Distribution op Lumber Product op the U. S.^ 

Northeastern Lake Southern Pacific 

Year States States States States 

Per cent. Per cent. Per cent. " Per cent. 

1850 54 6 13 3 

1860 36 13 116 6 

1870 36 24 9 3 

1880 24 33 11 3 

1890 18 36 15 7 

1900.. 16 27 25 9 

1910 9 15 43 18 

1915 5 15 50 18 

*"The Timber Supply of the United States.*' Forest Service Circular 
97, p. 4. (Except data for 1910 and 1915.) 



27S Geography 

• 

Soon after 1900 the Southern forest belt took first place in the 
production of lumber, her output in 1907 being about 35 per cent, 
of the total output of the United States, and in 1915 about 50 per 
cent. The South has nearly reached the maximum of her produc- 
tion, and only the Pacific Coast States will in the future show any 
considerable mcrease. 

Kinds. — Coniferous timber is generally classed as soft wood, and 
deciduous as hard wood. This is not strictly accurate, however. 
In the New England area the chief timber is now spruce and hemlock; 
in the Lake region, white pine; in the Southern forests, yellow pine 
and cypress; and in the Pacific Coast area, Douglas fir and redwood. 
The hardwood forests of the United States are found in the Appala- 
chian section from Maine to Alabama, and in the Lake States. 
The only state outside of these areas that produces hardwood in 
large quantities is Arkansas. 

In Norway, Sweden and Russia from 75 to 80 per cent, of the forest 
area is coniferous. Hungary, Germany and France have extensive 
hardwood forests. The forests of India are almost entirely hard- 
wood, but the trees differ from those of the temperate zone. Teak 
sandalwood and ironwood abound. 

For a long time white pine was the chief lumber used in the 
United States. In 1915 it ranked fourth, contributing only about 
7 per cent, of the total cut. Table 20 shows the rank of the most 
important kinds of wood in the United States in 1915.^ 

TABLE 20. 

Kinds of Wood Rank in 1915 

Yellow Pine 1 

Douglaa Fir 2 

Oak 3 

White Pine 4 

Hemlock 5 

Spruce 6 

Western Yellow Pine 7 

Cjrpress 8 

Maple 9 

Red Gum 10 

^Data obtained from Forest Service, U. S. Dept. of Agriculture. 



Per cent 


Cut in Board Feet 


40 


14,700,000,000 


12 


4,400,000,000 


8 


3,000,000,000 


7 


2,700,000,000 


6 


2,200,000,000 


3.5 


1,400,000,000 


3 


1,200,000,000 


2.9 


1,100,000,000 


2.4 


900,000,000 


1.8 


650,000,000 



Forest Prqducts 



279 



TABLE 21. 
Rank op Chief Timber-Producing States for Dates Given 



1880 


1890 


1900 


1910 


1915 


1. Mich. 


Mich. 


Wis. 


Waah. 


Wash. 


2. Penn. 


Wis. 


Mich. 


Tja. 


Tja. 


3. Wis. 


Penn. 


Minn. 


Minn. > 


Miss. 


4. N. Y. 


Minn-. ' 


§^/ 


Ore. 


N. C. 


5. Ind. 


Wash. 


Ark. 


Wis. 


Ark. 


6. Ohio 


N. Y. 


Wash. 


Texas 


Texafl 


7. Me. 


Texas 


Ga. 


Ark. - 


Ore. 


8. Minn. 


Ind. 


N. C. 


N. C. 


Ala. 


9. Ga. 


Ala. 


Texas 


Mich. 


Va. 


10. Ala. 


Ga. 


Miss. 


Va. 


Wis. 



Uses of Timber. — ^While timber is used for many purposes, 
lumber and fuel are the two most important. Tremendous quantities 
are used in the making of shingles, laths, crossties, cooperage stock, 
wood pulp, mine supports, fence posts, poles, furniture, vehicles, 
farm machinery, boxes and barrels. The United States uses more 
than 135,000,000 crossties annup.lly. Owing to the lack of oak 
timber on the Pacific Coast, oak crossties are imported from Japan. 
In 1914 the amount of timber used in the manufacture of pulp 
amounted to more than 4,000,000 cords, nearly one-half of which 
was spruce. It would require all of the spruce on several thousand 
acres of land to supply any one of ow largest daily newspapers with 
pulp for a year. During the year of 1015 more than 4,000,000 poles 
were used by telephone, telegraph and electric light companies. 
Cedar and chestnut are tl^ chief trees drawn upon for this purpose. 
For fence posts cedar andjiocust are generally used. Ilickory enters 
largely into the constrwition of vehicles, while map 1^ and oak are 
largely used in making furniture and as flooring. The great furniture 
centers in our country are: New York, Chicago, Grand Rapids, 
Saginaw and Philadelphia. 

Oiir Trade in Lumber. — We export vast quantities of lumber, 
the chief countries buying from us being Canada, the United King- 
dom, Argentina, Australi^, Netherlands, Germany, Mexico, Cuba, 
Belgium and France. From San Francisco, Portland and Puget 
Sound ports redwood and Douglas fir are exported to Australia, 
Asia and South America. 

Although California produces great quantities of lumber, the 



280 Geowraphy 

San FranciBco and nearby markets, as well as the Ix>s Angeles market, 
are to a lai^ extent supplied from Portland and Puget Sound. 
This is because the rates by water are much cheaper than those by 
rail, and much of California 's timber is far from the coast. Because 



FlQ. 121.— FeltLne an Oregon cedsr, 

of high freight rates from California to eastern points, large quanti- 
ties of second-grade lumber are kept at home and made into boxes 
to supply the growing home demand. * 

We import some teak from India, Burma and Siam. That is 
used in the construction of battle-ships, as it does not corrode the 
steel. We also buy some ebony from India, and mahogany from the 
West Indies, Central America and Mexico, 



Forest Products 281 

Prices. — Owing to the rapidly increasing demand and the de- 
creasing supply, as well as to a combination of the lumber interests, 
prices have steadily advanced. The following table shows the approx- 
imate average prices per thousand feet in the United States in 1899 
and 1915:2 

TABLE 22 

1899 1915 

Yellow pine $8.46 $12.41 

Douglas fir $8.67 $10 59 

White pine $12.69 $17.44 

Hemlock $9.98 $13.14 

Western pine $9.70 $14.32 

Spruce *. . . .$11.27 $1.6.58 

Cypress $13.32 $19.85 

Redwood $10.12 $13,54 

Oak $13.78 $18.73 

Walnut $48.47 

Future of the Lumber Supply. — So great is the quantity of lumber 
consumed annually, that the future supply for this and for all other 
countries is a question of grave importance. A century ago it seiemed 
as though our supply was inexhaustible, while today a shortage 
stares us in the face. We are steadily consuming our forest capital, 
for in the United States we are using the timber three or four times 
as fast as it grows. Unlike other crops, the timber crop is very slow 
to mature. In California sugar-pine trees two hundred years old 
average about thirty-two inches in diameter breast high, and are 
about 144 feet in height. Yellow pines of the same age average 
about thirty inches in diameter breast high, and are about 132 feet 
high. Our Forest Service tells us that the average age of trees cut 
in the United States in 1906 was about one hundred and fifty years. 

At the annual meeting of the Northern Pine Manufacturers* Asso- 
ciation, held in Minneapolis, January 22, 1907, the Secrietary, Mr. 
J. E. Rhodes, said: "Since 1895, 248 firms, representing an annual 
output of pine lumber of 4J^ billion feet, have retired from business, 
due to the exhaustion of their timber supply. Plants representing 
approximately 500 million feet capacity which sawed in 1906 will not 
be operated in 1907." 

This statement is very suggestive of the growing scarcity of timber. 
Trees are how being felled which, a few years ago, would have 
been rejected by the lumberman, and much material of a character 

2 Figures obtained from the Forest Service. ^ 



2^ Geoorafht 

formerly wasted is now being utilized. The use of brick, stone and 
plaster and concrete in house-building, of steel in ship-building, 
of wire in fencing, as well as creosote treatment of posts, poles, piling 
and crosaties, are all helping to conserve our failing timber supply. 
The scientific management of existing forests, and the reforestation of 
burned, logged, and other areas, is the solution of the lumber problem. 



General Statement — It was in the West Indies that rubber first 
came to the attention of Europeans. This led to the use of the term 
india rubber. When Columbus visited Haiti he observed the natives 
playing with rubber balls. In the eighteenth century Priestley, 
an English chemist, discovered that rubber could be used to erase 
pencil marks. Its value as applied to clothing was not dbcovered 
until much later. 

Most of the rubber of commerce is the product of the latex or 
milky juice of the rubber tree, of which there are several varieties. 



Forest pRODtjcw 283 

There are hundreds of latex-yielding plants, the milkweed and 
the poppy being among the number. A shrub called guayule, which 
grows in the dryer parts of Mexico, produces a fairly good rubber. 
In the latex of the rubber tree there are many minute globules of 
resin and caoutchouc, the latter being the substance from which 
rubber is produced. 

The rubber tree grows to a height of 60 or more feet, and sometimes 
attains a circumference of 10 feet. The leaves are three-lobed.. When 
the seed are ripe, the hot sunshine causes the capsules to burst with 
a report, and the seed are scattered in all directions. 

Distribution.— The Amazon valley is the chief source of the 
world 's supply of rubber. Bolivia, Peru, Central America, Mexico, 
India, Ceylon, Madagascar and equatorial Africa produce consider- 
able. The rubber tree does not flourish in any region where the tem- 
perature falls below 60° F. at any time of the year, and it does best 
where the mean temperature is about 80** F., and the rainfall from 
80 to 100 inches per year. Cbntrary to the belief held formerly, the 
rubber tree does not require a marshy soil. 

Processes. — The latex is obtained by tapping. Various methods 
are employed, the "herring-bone" being the most common. On 
either side of a central incision made parallel to the axis of the tree 
a number of incisions are made, which unite with the central one at 
an angle of 45°. This tapping covers practically one-half of the tree. 
A short tin spout leads the latex from the lower end of the main 
incision into a cup or other receptacle. Workmen visit the trees 
daily, and empty the contents of the cups into larger vessels. Trees 
are not usually tapped until they are four years old. A tree will 
yield about ten pounds of rubber yearly. Careless and too frequent 
tapping has destroyed many trees. 

The collectors carry the latex to the camp, where it is poured into 
large caldrons under which are fires made of palm nuts. The smoke 
from the burning nuts causes the rubber to coagulate about wooden 
paddles. which the workmen dip into the caldrons. 

As a result of repeatedly dipping the paddle into the caldron and 
holding it in the smoke, a considerable quantity of rubber forms about 
it. After being thoroughly dried, these pieces of rubber, called 
*'hams" or '^biscuits," are removed from the paddles, and are then 
ready for exportation. 

When the crude rubber reaches the factory it is placed in tanks 



containing warm water; this softens it so that it can be cut up and 
run between rollers. Water falling upon the rubber while it is be- 



tween the rollers frees it from leaves and dirt. Much of the planta- 
tion rubber is sufficiently clean to make washing unnecessary, but 
most of the world 's supply yet comes from uncultivated forest trees. 



Forest Products 285 

In 1823 Mr. Mackintosh first made the garments which were 
given his name. This was accomplished by dissolving the rubber 
in a liquid such as turpentine. On the evaporation of the liquid the 
rubber was left in the form of a fihn. This was spread on cloth, thus 
water-proofing it. 

As rubber is readily affected by high and low temperatures, its 
use in the manufacture of clothing was not very satisfactory until 
after the process of vulcanizing was discovered. This was worked 
out independently by Mr. Goodyear in America in 1839, and by Mr. 
Hancock in London. The method commonly employed is that of 
mixing rubber and powdered sulphur, and heating the mass out of 
contact with the air. 

Uses. — India-rubber is used in many ways, the most common 
being the making of rubber boots, rubbers, overshoes, mackintoshes, 
hats, rubber bands, toys, tubing, waterproof cloth, printing rolls, 
stamps, stoppers, tires for bicycles and automobiles. About one- 
third of the crude rubber is used in the making of boots, rubbers and 
overshoes. The increased use of automobiles has very greatly in- 
creased the demand for rubber. 

Exports. — The larger part of the crude rubber of the world is 
exported from the Amazon valley. Para, which is situated close 
to the mouth of the Amazon, is the great exporting center. For the 
three years ending with 1915 approximately 16 per cent, of the total 
value of Brazil's exports was in the form of rubber. The average 
value of the rubber exported for the same period was about $40,000,- 
000. Since 1910 there has been a great increase in the value, of the 
rubber exported. 

More than one-half of the exports of Brazil go to the United 
States, and the remainder to Europe. Both London and Liverpool 
receive large quantities. Owing to destructive methods employed 
in tapping, and to increased demand, the prices of rubber have risen 
greatly during recent years. For the three-year period ending with 
1915 the average price of the rubber imported by the United States 
was about 60 cents per pound. 

Gutta-Percha. — Gutta-percha is quite similar to rubber. It is 
produced in the East Indies, Malay Peninsula and the Philippines; 
Singapore being the chief exporting point. In obtaining gutta- 
percha the trees are usually cut down instead of being tapped while 
standing. The milk, which soon thickens and hardens, is placed in 
boiling water. This softens it so that it can be worked in any form 
desired. It is freed from bark, sand, chips and other impurities by 



2S6 Geography 

being ground in water. It ia then rolled into thin sheets br balls, 
and pressed. No other plastic substance possesses as great elec- 
trical resistance as does gutta-percha. It retains this quality 
when used underground and in water. Because of this it is px- 



Fia. 124.— Tapping for turpentine. (Courte»y of the V. S. ForMt Service.) 

tensively employed as an insulating medium for submarine and 
underground cables. It is also used in the manufacture of hose, 
buckets and bottles. 

Turpentine. — The turpentine industry is one of considerable 
importance in our Southeastern States, in France, Russia, Austria 



Forest Products 287 

and Sdandinavia. In the spring, when the sap begins to rise in the 
trees, the work of tapping the trees and collecting the crude turpen- 
tine begins. The methods formerly employed were very destructive, 
and large areas of yellow pine, the tree which furnishes most of the 
turpentine, were ruined. The crude product is distilled, and thus 
the turpentine of commerce is obtained. 

Our Bureau of Chemistry has carried on mvestigations which 
have shown that all of the turpentine needed in this country can be 
made from dead trees, stumps and sawdust. If this waste material 
were utilized it would result in a great saving to our forests. The 
United Statesis the world's greatest exporter of spirits of turpentine, 
shipping to other countries in the year ending June 30, 1915, about 
$4,500,000 worth. The exports during 1915 were far below the 
average, which for the five-year period ending with 1915 was more 
than $8,000,000. 

The turpentine industry in our country is moving southward, and 
is now important in the Gulf States. The product is shipped from 
Wilmington, North Carolina, Charleston, Tampa, Mobile and New 
Orleans. Turpentine is extensively used in paints and varnishes. 
It facilitates drying through the formation of ozone. 

Rosin. — In the process of distilling, the spirits of turpentine is 
carried ofif in the steam, after which it is recovered through condensa- 
tion, and a solid substance called rosin is left behind. It is used in 
the manufacture of soaps and varnishes, in sizing paper, in soldering, 
and on violin bows. The United States exports more rosin than do 
all other countries combined. v 

Pitch, Tar and Creosote. — Through the distillation of wood, a 
black substance known as pitch is obtained. When this is boiled 
down, tar results. These substances are used in caulking vessels and 
in the manufacture of tarred paper. Creosote, used to preserve posts 
and pilings, is also a product of pitch. 

Tanbark. — In the tanning of leather the bark of certain trees, 
the hemlock and oak particularly, is extensively employed. The 
tannic acid which the bark contains penetrates the pores of the 
leather, hardening it and rendering it durable. Owing to the bulk 
of the bark, its shipment is not economical, and our great shoemaking 
centers have therefore been located close to the forests. In recent 
years the acid has been extracted from the bark, thus making it 
unnecessary tp have the leather and shoe industry so strictly localized. 

Cork. — The world's supply of cork comes very largely from 
Spain, Portugal and Algeria. In Spain and Portugal the trees are 



288 Geography 

cultivated, but in Algeria there are as yet only natural forest trees. 
The first growth of bark on most trees is of a corky character, but the 
cork of commerce is obtained from the bark of an evergreen oak. 
When the trees are about 15 years old the bark is first removed. This 
first cutting, which is called male bark, is of no commercial value. 
Later cuttings occur at intervals of 8 or 10 years for 100 years or more. 

After the cork has been removed from the tree, it is pressed into 
sheets, and then placed in boiling water. Through the process of 
boiling, the cork becomes much more elastic and its bulk is increased. 
The sheets are shipped in bales. 

Cork is used in making stoppers for bottles, floats for nets, life 
preservers, and as inner soles for shoes. 

There are many other products of the foredt of considerable 
value, such as quinine, camphor, spices and flavors. 

STUDIES 

What European countries import lumber? How long will our timber supply 
last? How does the value of our forest products compare with the value of our 
agricultural products? Make a list of the industries which draw upon the 
products of the forests. What is the chief building material in your locality? 
About how much rubber is required in the United States yearly by the 
automobile industry? 

REFERENCES 

"Lumber, Lath and Shingles. Dept. of Commerce. Bureau oj the Census. 
- (Yearly.) 

"Our Timber Supply." Forest Service, 1914. 

Smith, Herbert: " Saving the Forests." Nai. Geog, Mag., vol. xix, p. 619. 
Stevens, H. P.: ** Rubber." 

"Sugar Pine and Western Yellow Pine in California." Forest Service BuUetin 69. 
"The Timber Supply of the United States." Forest Service Circular 166, 1909. 



PART FOUR 

ANIMALS IN THEIR RELATION TO MAN 

CHAPTER XXV 

Animals as Sources op Food 

General Statement. — Without the aid which man receives from 
both wild and domesticated animals, his life would be very different 
from what it is today. When man learned to domesticate animals 
and make them his servants, he made a great advance in civilization. 
Animals furnish material used as food, clothing, in the construction of 
rude habitations, as ornaments, and they are exceedingly valuable 
in the transportation of people and commodities and in the tilling 
of the soil. 

Until comparatively recently the food products of animals, being 
perishable, did not enter largely into commerce. Formerly those 
products were used by the owners of the animals from which they 
were obtained, or they were barterecTor sold to people living close 
at hand. Division of labor and the growth of population, especially 
great cities, made commerce in these commodities a necessity. 

Rapid means of transportation, refrigeration, and various forms 
of preserving these perishable articles have solved the problem. 
No longer does a community or nation have to produce its own food 
or other necessities of life. Great Britain furnishes an excellent 
illustration of this. The people, taking advantage of their vast 
mineral wealth, of the short distance between interior points and 
the coast, of their favorable commercial position and of their large 
population, are devoting themselves primarily to industry and com- 
merce, and depend very largely upon the outside world for food and 
clothing. Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, Canada and the 
United States are among the countries which supply animal product^ 
to Great Britain. 

The Meat Industry. — In most parts of the world meat is an 
important food. Beef, mutton and pork are the meats chiefly used, 
although the flesh of many other animals is utilized. 

The great cattle ranches of the world are located where there are 
vast areas of uncultivated land. There must be suflScient precipita- 
tion to insure pasturage. Comparative freedom from snow is a 
favorable condition, as this enables stock to secure at least a part 
of their living out of doors during the winter. These conditions 
exist in the western part of the United States, Argentina, Uruguay, 

19 289 



V 



290 Geography 

Paraguay, Australia and Canada, and these countries are exporters 
of beef and mutton. 

In our country the cattle industry has been steadily pushed west- 
ward as settlement has increased and the price of land advanced. 
In the Southwest the winters are not so severe as they are in the 
Northwest, where blizzards occasionally occur. The Chinook winds, 
being relatively warm and very dry, cause the snow to evaporate 
rapidly in this northwest section, and hence cattle forage considerably 
during the winter. 

A productive farm can support several times as many cattle as 
can be supported on the same area of uncultivated land. Because 
of this, about 45 per cent, of the cattle in the United States are found 
in the Middle Western States. Many of these are dairy cows, and 
many are cattle which have been taken from the Western ranges into 
the corn belt to be corn-fed for market. 

TABLE 23. 
Average Number op Cattle for the Five- Year Period Ending with 1915.^ 

State Round numbers 

Texas 6,200,000 

Iowa 4,000,000 

Nebraska 3,300,000 

Wisconsin 2,600,000 

New York 2,500,000 

Kansas 2,300,000 

Minnesota : . . 2,250,000 

Illinois 2,200,000 

Missouri 2,200.000 

Ohio 1,700,000 

United States 54,600,000 

The cost of beef in our country has increased during recent years. 
One reason for this is found in decreasing pasturage. Since 1840 the 
population of the United States has increased more than 500 per 
cent., but the number of cattle has increased only 400 per cent. 

The average annual value of our expor ation of beef and beef 
products for the five-year period ending with June 30, 1916, was 
in round numbers $32,000,000. Between the years 1901 and 1914 
there was a great decrease in the amount and value of our exportation 
of beef. The war demand caused an enormous increase in exporta- 
tion. Argentina now holds the place fo merly occupied by the United 
Stat es as an exporter of beef. A part of our export is shipped as 

^Yearbooks, U. S. Department of Agriculture. 



Animals as Sources of Food 291 

chilled beef, a part on the hoof, and a part canned. The British Isles, 
France and Germany are our largest buyers of fresh beef. Much 
beef is exported from Australia to the British Isles. 

As sheep can secure pasturage where cattle cannot, many semi- 
arid parts of the world raise lai^e numbers of sheep, Australia, 
South Africa, Spain and some of our Southwestern States are illustra- 
tions. One herder with a dog can take care of a very large number 
of sheep, which reduces the cost of producing mutton. 



Fen. i25.— Cattle ranch. Canada. 

Through scientific breeding the quality of the mutton has been 
greatly improved. Large quantities of this meat are exported from 
Australia and New Zealand to the countries of western Europe. 

TABLE 24. 
AvERAOE NtiMBEH or Sheep for thb Fivb-Year Period Endinq with 1915.* 

Stat£ Round numben 

Montana 4,800,000 

Wyoming 4,700,000 

Ohio 3,450,000 

New Mexico 3,200,000 

Idaho 3,000,000 

Oregon 2,600,000 

California 2,500,000 

Michigan . . . '. 2,200,000 

Texas 2,000,000 

Utah 2,000,000 

MlBsouri 2,000,000 

United States 51,400.000 _ 

^Yearbooks, U. S. Department of Agriculture. 



292 Geography 

Swine, not requiring the range that is necessary for cattle and 
sheep, are raised in large numbers in many densely populated parts 
of the world. In European countries they are fed to some extent 
upon nuts, acorns and sugar-beet refuse, but in our country com 
is the chief food, and most of the hogs are found in the corn belt. 
In our Western States the growing of alfalfa and the raising of hogs 
are very commonly associated. 

The chief hog-raising countries of the world are: the United States, 
Germany, Austria-Hungary, European Russia, France and the 
United Kingdom. As many hogs are raised in the United States as 
in all the other countries named. 

The slaughtering and meat-packing industry affords investment 
for a vast amount of money, and employment for hundreds of thou- 
sands of persons. The work is highly specialized. In the United 
States our greatest meat-packing centers are in or near the corn belt. 
Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas City, Omaha, St. Joseph and St. Paul are 
the most important. 

In many cases animals are inspected before being kiUed, and 
if not found to be in a healthy condition are rejected. Government 
officials, both in the United States and in some foreign countries, 
inspect the meat offered for sale, and stamp it to show that such 
inspection has been made. 

The Dairy Industry. — Milk is an article of food used in every 
part of the civilized world. The milk of goats, camels, reindeer 
and asses is used to some extent, but that of the cow is of pri- 
mary importance. Milk is secreted from the blood, and on the 
average contains about 87 per cent, of water, nearly 4 per cent, of 
fat, 2.5 per cent, of casein, 0.7 per cent, of albumen, 5.1 per cent, 
of milk-sugar, and 0.7 per cent, of ash. The scientific breeding 
of cattle has given us a larger yield of milk per cow, and a better 
quality as well. 

The securing of a supply of fresh and pure milk for our large 
cities is a very important matter. London, Paris, New York and 
other large cities obtain milk from points many miles away. This 
was not possible before the days of the railroad. Shipment of milk 
in cans has in large part given place to shipment in bottles. This 
means an increase in cost, but a purer supply. Condensed milk and 
cream are very important in situations where the natural products 
cannot be obtained. 

As a result of the former careless methods used in handling milk, 
dust and dirt found its way into it. This meant the introduction of 



Ammals as Sources op Food . 293 

bacteria also. The bacteria change the milk-sugar to acid, and hence 
cause the milk to sour. By heating milk to a temperature of 60" 
to 70° C. (140°-157° F.) and holdmg it at this temperature for 20 
minutes, the bacteria are destroyed. The milk is then rapidly cooled. 
The process, which is called pasteurization, after Pasteur, its inventor, 
increases the keeping quality of milk. In 1893 Mr. Nathan Straus, 



the well-known philanthropist, began the pasteurization of milk 
in New York City in order to reduce the death-rate among infants. 
During all of these years the milk has been distributed at a loss. 
Mr. Straus has given large sums for the same great work in many 
cities in this and other countries. The milk sold in most of our 
cities and towns is tested, usually under the direction of Boards of 
Health. The test is of great value to the producer as well as to the 
customer, for by testing the milk of each cow the dairyman knows 
which ones are not profitable to him. 

Naturally those areas, so situated as to be ab'e to supply the lai^ 
cities are the chief producers of milk if they have the necessary pas- 
turage, or the feed of other kinds. 



294 Geography 

TABLE 25 
Chief Milk-Producing States in Oub Country in 1910.* 

State Gallons (round namben) 

New York 697,000,000 

Wisconsin 458,000,000 

Pennsylvania 336,000,000 

Illinois 320,000,000 

Iowa 318,000,000 

Ohio 307,000,000 

Michigan 283,000,000 

Minnesota 273,000,000 

Texas 197,000,000 

Indiana 194,000,000 

Butter. — The fat in milk is in the form of very minute globules. 
The fat, being lighter than the milk, rises to the surface of the recep- 
tacles in which the milk is contained, forming cream. The old-fash- 
ioned method was to skim off the cream and chum it. The invention 
of the separator has revolutionized the dairying industry. The 
separator is in effect a ^eat bowl into which the milk is placed, and 
which revolves several thousand times a minute. Centrifugal force 
throws the fat to the center, and it escapes from an opening in the 
cover. The milk is drawn off from the edge of the bowl. By this 
process from 97 to 98 per cent, of the fat is saved. 

The farmer delivers his milk to the creameries. Here it is put 
through the separator, and the so-called skimmed milk is carried 
home and fed to hogs or calves. The butter is made at the creameries 
and shipped to the cities. Under our Pure Food Law butter must con- 
tain 82.5 per cent, of fat, and must not exceed 16 per cent, of water. 

TABLE 26. 

Average Annual Exportation op Butter for the Five- Year Period Ending 

with 1913.* 

Country Pounds (round numbers) Rank 

Denmark 195,530,000 1 

Russia 150,093,000 2 

Australia 77,858,000 3 

Netherlands 75,132,000 4 

Sweden 46,567,000 5 . 

France 41,682,000 6 

New Zealand 38,760,000 7 

Finland 26,337,000 8 

World .690,645,000 

^Statistical Abstract of the Thirteenth Census, 1912, p. 179. 
^Yearbooks, U. S. Department of Agriculture, 1913 and 1914. 



Anuials as Sources of Food 295 

Cheese. — Canada leads the world in the exportation of 
cheese. The Netherlands rank second, ajid Switzerland, New 
Zealand and Italy export lai^e quantities. As an importer, the 
United Kingdom is far in the lead, but Germany, the United 
States, Belgium and France are large buyers. The first cheese 
factory in the United States was established in Oneida County, 
New York, in 1851. 



'la. 127. — A sheeM fsotory in Victoria. Aiuttatis, (CourUsy F. T. A. Fricke, Victoria.) 

^ " _ TABLE 27. 

Leadinq Cheese-Pboducipjo States in 1914.'' 

State Pounds (round numbers) 

Wisconsin 206,000,000 

New York 97,000,000 

Pennsylvania 15,000,000 

Michigan 13,000,000 

. Ohio 9,000,000 

^StatiHtioal.Abstract o( the United Stafsa, 1917, p. 164, 



296 Geography 

The Poultry ladustry. — There are few farms in this or in^any 
other country on which some poultry is not kept. In addition, 
many fowls are raised in towns and cities. Although chickens are 
the most numerous and the most valuable, ducks, turkeys, geese and 
other fowls are raised in large numbers. 



Fio. 128.— The fsrxi Sock— White Flimouth RocUb. 

Formerly poultry-raising was entirely incidental to farming. 
Today it is a regular industry. Owing to rapid transportation and 
refrigeration, both poultry and eggs are now shipped long distances. 
This is illustrated by the shipment of eggs from Argentina to 
England, and from China to the United States. Eggs and poul- 
try are placed in cold storage when better prices are desired. In our 
country the Central States are the chief producers of poultry and 
poultry products. 



Animals as Sources op Food 297 

TABLE 28. 
Poultry and Eggs in the United States." 

Date Fowls Eggs (in dozens) 

1880 125,500,000 457,000,000 

1890 285,000,000 820,000,000 

1900 250,000,000 1,000,000,000 

1918 ' 589,000,000 1,921,000,000 

The total farm value of the poultry and eggs produced in our 
country in 1914 was about $550,000,000. This is about six times 
the value of all of the gold mined in the United States during the 
same year; about five times the total value of our sugar output; 
more than four times the value of the barley; more than two and 
one-half times the value of the potato crop; more than the value of 
the oats; and it nearly equals the value of our wheat crop. 

THE FISHING INDUSTRY 

Fish. — The sea, as well as the land, yields valuable harvests of 
food. For thousands of years people living near the sea have turned 
to it for a part of their food supply. Fish depend in large measure 
upon plant life for food. As. few plants grow in deep water, and as 
plant and animal life washed into the sea from the land are most 
abundant near shore, it is here that fish exist in greatest numbers. 
Some fish, such as the cod, eat smaller fish. A given fish has a rela- 
tively small vertical range of habitat, owing to the rapid increase 
in pressure with increase in depth. 

Land animals which are raised for food require much care, but 
fish in their natural state do not. For this reason fish, generally 
speaking, is cheaper than meat. Although the number of fish in the 
sea is enormous, long-continued and destructive methods of fishing 
have greatly reduced the numbers in some cases. This applies 
particularly to fish that ascend rivers to spawn. Our government 
and that of some other countries, notably Japan, have established 
departments for the scientific study of the fishing industry. 

Waters more than three miles from the coast of a country are 
free to all. Within this limit the right to fish is restricted to the people 
of the given country. The necessity for food on the part of the 
nations of western Europe led fishing vessels to the Grand Banks 
before the year 1500. With the discovery of northeastern America 
t he importance of Newfoundland and adjacent areas as drying* 

** United States Census Reports, 1910. 

^Estimate Yearbook, U. S. Department of Agriculture, 1918, p. 13. 



298 Geoorafht 

grounds for the fish became apparent. This led to much frictiou 
between England and France, and later to troubles between England 
and her colonies. Indeed, as late as 1912 it was necessary for the 
United States and England to enter into a new treaty. 

The United States, the British Isles, Norway, France, Canada 
and Japan are among the most important fishing nations. The 
Shetland Islands, north of Scotland; the Dogger Bank, northeast of 
Hull, England; and the Grand Banks are important cod-fishing 



Fio. 129.— Tskiiic ■ large Chinook lolmon (rom a uine in the Columbia River. W. 8. D. A.) 

grounds. From early days the lishing industry was important in 
New England. The States are relatively close to the Banks, the 
people lived near the coast, and conditions were not very favorable 
for agriculture. "So thoroughly did the colonists recognize the 
importance of the fishing industry that the legislature of Massachu- 
setts hung in the hall of representatives of their state capitol a wooden 
representation of a codfish; moreover, they hung it where the eyes 
of the Speaker could always see it, so that he might keep in mind the 
most important interest of the people of the community."* 

The people of New England aoid large quantities of a very poor 
quality of fish to the slave owners in the West Indies, The New 
Ellwand ships carried home cargoes of molasses, which commodity 

^Moore: "Industrial Hietory of the American People," p. 33. 



Animals as Sources op Food 299 

was at great profit converted into rum. Much of this rum was used 
in the purchase of slaves on the West Coast of Africa. This is a strik- 
ing illustration of the ways in which the fishing industry has been 
connected with the history of the world. 

At the present time. (1917) the value of our annual catch of fish 
is nearly $50,000,000. The Japanese hold high rank in the fishing 
industry. The catch of several other nations is more valuable, but 
in no other country is so large a proportion of the total population 
engaged in the industry. The proximity to the sea, their very exten- 
sive coast-line, their large population and the relatively small area 
of tillable land are factors which increase the importance of fishing. 

One of the chief food fishes is the salmon. Formerly these fish 
were abundant in the North Atlantic, but they are now greatly 
reduced. The salmon fishery is important from the Sacramento 
River northward, the southeastern coast of Alaska being the chief 
fishing grounds. The protected bays at the mouths of the streams 
up which the salmon go to spawn furnish excellent opportunities 
for fishing, for the establishments of canneries and salteries, and afford 
deep water for the anchorage of vessels. Destructive methods are 
reducing the numbers here also. It is of the greatest importance 
that the fish be not prevented from ascending the rivers to spawn, 
for if they be prevented from doing so, there will be no future supply 
of the fish in the streams. It is an interesting fact that none returns 
alive to the ocean after spawning. 

The cod is a fish of great value. As it inhabits relatively deep 
water, it is caught by means of hook and line only. When the fishing 
grounds are reached, men in small boats called dories set the lines, 
to each of which a large number of hooks are attached. At interv^tls 
the lines are pulled up, the fish taken off, and the hooks rebaited. 
This is known as trawl fishing. 

The herring is a very important fish, inhabiting relatively cold 
waters. There are important fisheries in the United States, Canada, 
Japan and the North Sea countries. In New England and western 
Europe herring are canned and sold as sardines. 

Along the coast of Brittany the sardine fishery is highly important. 
The name is derived from the island of Sardinia. Technically there 
is no such fish as the sardine. The term is most commonly applied 
to the young of the pilchard. 

Other important food fishes are the halibut, mackerel, shad among 
salt-water fishes, and in fresh water the trout, white fish and stur- 
geon. Thefishing industry on theGreat Lakesisof considerable value. 



300 Geoqrapht 

Neither Great Britain nor Germany can supply herself with meat, 
and hence fishing is an important industry. In 1912 the catch in 
Great Britain was valued at $64,405,331. Germany encourages the 
industry by paying a bounty on all fishing vessels built, and by ship- 
ping the fish by rail at very low rates. 

Oystera. — For 2,000 years oysters have been cultivated in China 
and Italy. They are now obtained from natural and cultivated 



Fio. 130.~-OyBteriDg in Cheupeake Bay 

beds in many countries, although the United States and France 
are the most important. The world's annual output is worth 
about $25,000,000. 

More oj^ters are produced in Chesapeake Bay than in any other 
similar body of water. Baltimore is the center for this field. Many 
oysters are produced in New England waters, in the Southern States 
and on the Pacific Coast. Cancale, near St. Malo, France, depends 
almost entirely upon the oyster industry. 

The oyster belongs to the group MoUtisca, as does the clam. 
Except at the very beginning of its existence, it is stationary, and in 



Animals as Sources of Food 301 

this respect differs from most animals. Ifc has many enemies, which 
greatly reduce its numbers. The starfish, black drum and stingray 
are among the most important. 

The oyster farmer covers his fishing grounds with shells, stones 
or broken crockery, or he arranges trays upon the bottom, or, as in 
Japan, pushes bamboo poles into the mud. The object in all of these 
cases is to furnish something to which the oysters can attach them- 
selves. Oysters are harvested by means of dredges drawn behind 
boats or by hand, using rakes and tongs. From two to four years are 
required to bring the oyster to a marketable condition. 

Lobsters, crabs, snails, turtles and various other sea animals are 
used as food. The lobster industry is important in Brittany and oflf 
the New England coast. Turtles are shipped from Florida to New 
York and to London. 

THE BEE INDUSTRY 

For thousands of years honey has been used as a food. References 
to it are found in the Bible. At first the supplies came from wild 
bees, but bees are now kept in practically all countries. One who 
makes a business of bee-keeping is known as an apiarist. On many 
farms bee-keeping is merely an incidental. 

In 1909 nearly 55,000,000 pounds of honey and 900,000 pounds 
of wax were reported as produced in the United States. The total 
value of the product was about $6,000,000. California far outranks 
any other state in the value of her honey and wax. Other very 
important producers are: Texas, New York, Missouri and Iowa. 

In the northern and central parts of the United States much 
buckwheat is sown for bees. East of the Rocky Mountains a great 
deal of honey is produced from white clover, and in the Western 
States much sage-honey is made. 

The sugar shortage during the World War turned our attention 
more definitely to honey. The production of this commodity can 
be very greatly increased. ,This would materially decrease our 
importation of sugar. 

STUDIES 

Where is the world to get its meat supply 100 years from now? Why 
8 the price of meat advancing? What European countries are especially 
adapted to dairying? Why? What made possible the shipping of meat and 
dairy products from AustraUa and Kew Zealand to the British Isles? What 
measures ha^e been taken to insure a lasting supply of fish from ocean waters? 
Are any wild animals in danger of extermination because of their slaughter for 
food? Is it necessary to conserve meats and fats during times of peace? 



302 



Geography 



REFERENCES 

Clark, E. D.: "Shipping Fish Three Thousand Miles to Market," Yearbook, 

U. S. Dept. of Agri., 1915, p. 155. 
Deiteweg, George: "The Meat-Inspection Service of the U. S. Dept. of Agri- 
culture." Yearbook, U. S. Dept. of Agri., 1916, p. 77. 
Joss, E. C: "Meat Production in Australia and New IZealand." Yearbook, 

U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, 1914, p. 421. 
Melvin, a. D.: "Meat Production in the Argentine and Its Effect Upon the 

Industry in the United States." Yearbook, U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, 1914, 

p. 381. 
Pennington, Pierce and Shrader: "The Egg and Poultry Demonstration Car 

Work in Reducing our $50,000,000 Waste in Eggs." Yearbook, U. S, Dept. 

of Agriculture, 1914, p. 363. 
Smith, Hugh M.: "America's Surpassing Fisheries." Nai. Geog. Mag., vol. 

29, p. 546. 
Smith, Hugh, M.: "Federal Fish Farming." Nat. Geog. Mag., vol. 21, p. 418. 

(Fish, oysters and sponges.) 
Smith, Hugh M.: "Oysters: The World's Most Valuable Crop." Na£. Geog. 

Mag., vol. 25, page 257. 



CHAPTER XXl^l 






A- 



Animals as Sources of Glot^ing 

Wool. — ^The sheep produces, a doubje crop — wool and mutton. 
Wool is of particular value owing to the microscopic, overlapping 
serrations on the fiber. Because of these, goods very close in texture 
can be made. The average length of the fiber is about seven inches. 

The merino sheep, which originated in Spain centuries ago, 
produces the best grade of wool. Through scientific breeding, the 
yield has been increased and the quality improved. Much merino 
wool is now shipped from Austrjalia, New Zealand and South Africa. 
London> Antwerp, Havre, Plj^iadelphia and Boston are very impor- 
tant wool markets. 

Formerly all shearing was dpne by hand, but today machinery is 
largely employed, as this reduces the cost. When the wool reaches 
the factories it is thoroughly washed to rid it of dirt and grease. 
In spite of the fact that our- country produces much wool, we 
import extensively. 

TABLE 29. 

Chief Sheep-Raisinq Countries ^ 

Country and Date Round numbers 

Australia, 1917 . . , 76,669,000 

Argentina, 1914 43,225,000 

United States, 1919 49,863,000 

European Russia, 1914 37,240,000 

Turkey, 1913 . . 27,095,000 

Asiatic Russia, 1914 .... 34,468,000 

Britishasles, 1918 27,063,000 

New Zealand, 1918 26,538,000 

A long, white lustrous wool, known as mohair, is obtained from 
the Angara goat. Turkey, South Africa, Algeria, Argentina, Mexico 
and Spain are the countries in which the Angora goat is raised in 
largest numbers. Some are raised in Texas and California. 

Leather.— rLeather is made by tanning the skins of animals. The 
bark of the heirilock and the oak furnish an acid which is very 
valuable in tanning. For this reason tanneries have in the past 
generally been lpcat64. close to hemlock or oak forests. 

. . -1 J»,_ : ^ , 

1 Yearbook, U. S. Depar£ng[ent of Agriculture. 

303- 



Animals as Sources op Clothing 305 

Skins are soaked in viats containing lime in solution. This 
loosens the hair so that it can readily be scraped off. The hides 
are then placed in water in order to remove the lime. The tan- 
nic acid enters the pores of the skin and hardens the lower layer, 
or derma, so that it endures wear well. Leather is not dyed as 
textiles are, but when an artificial color is desired it is put on by 
means of a brush. 

The chief articles of clothing made from leather are boots and 
shoes. Others Jess important are gloves, mittens, caps, aprons, belts, 
coats and satchels. The hides of cattle are employed more exten- 
sively than are the skins of other animals, but the skins of horses, 
sheep, goats, reindeer, dogs and some wild animals are used. 

Silk. — The seemingly insignificant silkworm, or silk caterpillar, 
produces yearly raw silk worth millions of dollars. The first requisite 
is the mulberry tree, for upon the leaves of this tree the silkworm 
feeds. Although other leaves are used to some extent, such as 
those of the osage-orange, nothing else equals the mulberry. 
The second essential is cheap labor. Both of these conditions are 
found in China, Japan, Italy and France, which are the chief pro- 
ducers of raw silk. 

The Chinese are given credit for having discovered how to manu- 
facture silk goods. The United States now manufactures more silk 
than does any other country, although we produce little raw silk. 
About one-half of our raw silk comes from Japan, and about one-half 
of the silk goods which we import comes from France. 

In 1914 there were in the United States 902 establishments for 
the manufacture of silk goods, and the value of the output during 
the same year was $254,011,257. Table 30 shows the growth in our 
importation of raw silk. 

TABLE 30. 

Importation op Raw Silk by the United States.^ 

Years Pounds (round numbers) 

1870 500,000 

1880 .* 2,500,000 

1890 7,500,000 

1900 13,000,000 

1910 23,500,000 

1917 40,300,000 



^ Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1917, p. 748. 
20 



306 Geography 

Paterspn, New Jersey, is the world's greatest center for the 
manufacture of silk ribbons. Lyons, France, is the chief French 
center for the manufacture of silk goods. Krefeld, Germany, and 
Milan, Italy, are other important silk-manufacturing centers. 

The leaves of the mulberry tree are picked, washed, dried, cut 
into small pieces, and then fed to the silkworms. The worms are 
kept on trays in clean rooms having a imiform temperature. Until 
full grown, the worms are fed several times daily. They live about 
a month, and when mature are about two" inches long, and cream- 
white in color. They spin the cocoons from which the raw silk is 
later unwound. 

When silkworms are desired, the moths are permitted to hatch 
from the cocoons. 

The moth lays a large number of eggs, about as large as the head 
of an ordinary pin, and from these the worms hatch. Moths are 
not permitted to hatch from the cocoons from which silk is to be 
unwound, because when the moths break from the cocoons the silk 
is ruined. 

Furs. — Both because of their warmth and beauty, furs have been 
made into articles of clothing for many centuries. Formerly, owing 
to the low cost, the poor as well as the rich wore furs. Today they 
are very expensive, because fur-bearing animals have decreased 
greatly in numbers. 

Much of the early history of the United States and of Canada 
is connected with the fur industry. It was the fur trade of the upper 
Missouri that led the Frenchman La Clede to establish a post where 
St. Louis now stands. It was the search* for beavers that led people 
from the East to California. 

The Hudson 's Bay Company, which was formed in 1670, bought 
furs of the trappers, and furnished the latter with supplies. This 
company, which is. still in existence, practically controlled affairs in 
Canada for a long time. Today Edmonton is the outfitting center, 
and Winnipeg is Canada's great fur market. 

For the same reason that furs are most useful to man in cold 
regions, we find the chief fur-bearing animals in the arctic or sub- 
arctic zones. So rapidly have these animals diminished in numbers 
in our country that Canada and Russia are the chief producers of 
furs. Our chief centers, as far as a domestic supply is concerned, 
are St. Louis and St. Paul, but New York is the great center for 
imported furs. Leipzig, Germany, leads the world as a fur market. 

The most important fur-bearing animals are: the otter, beaver, 



AmMAis AS Sources op Clothing 307 

sable, mink, fox, fisher, marten, seal, muskrat, raccoon, bear, skunk 
and rabbit. Formerly beavers were very nui^erous in this country, 
but they are now scarce. Their fur was extenaively.used iu the manu- 
facture of hats. In 1638 the English Parliament, in order to stimulate 
trade in this commodity, passed a law making it illegal to manufac- 
ture hats from any other fur than that of the beaver. 



Alaska is the chief source of the fur seal. Its summer home is 
on the Fribilof Islands. The killing of the animals is under govern- 
ment supervision. In the fall the seals migrate southward. From 
San Francisco the pelts are shipped to London, which is the chief 
center for the manufacture of sealskm garments. 

In the United States and Canada there are farms where certain 
of the fur-bearing animals are raised. This applies particularly to 
the black and silver-gray foxes. A single pelt of one of these 
animals sometimes sells for as much as $1,500.00. Along the shore of 
Maryland muskrat farming is carried on, and the mink and skunk 
are raised in various localities. From Australia great numbers of 
rabbit-skins are shipped to Europe. 



308 GEOaRAPHY 



STUDIES 



What advantage has wool as a fiber? Why are there more sheep than cattle 
in Australia? What animals furnish skins for the leather industry? Why is 
the price of shoes so much higher than it was a few years ago? Is the raw silk 
industry likely to become important in the United States? Explain. Why do 
most of the furs come from cold countries? 

REFERENCES 

Dearborn, Ned: " Fiu^-Farming as a Side Line." Yearbook, U. S. Dept. of 

Agri., 1916, p. 489. 
Hooper, Lutheb: "Silk " 
Hunter, J. A.: "Wool" 

KiNNE AND Cooley: "Shelter and Clothing,'* chapter x (Wool). 
KiNNE AND Cooley: "Shelter and Clothing," chapter xi ''Silk). 



CHAPTER XXVII 
Draft Animals 

Horses are more largely employed in carrying on farm work than 
in any other line. Although on very large farms engines are to some 
extent employed in plowing the ground, and in semi-arid regions in 
harvesting wheat, agriculture and horses are inseparably connected. 
Horses are of great value also in transportation. The products of 
the farm, the forest, the quarry and the mine are in most cases 
transported by horses or other animals from the place of production 
to the nearest railroad or water route. Great numbers of horses are 
used in moving commodities in cities, although the auto- truck, 
because of larger load and greater speed, is rapidly taking the place 
of the horse for this work. Many horses are yet used for riding and 
driving, and also in war. 

Russia raises more horses than does any other country. There 
is a large home demand, because the population is almost entirely 
agricultural. Moreover, there is a comparatively small mileage of 
railroad, inland waterways are not extensively used, and a consider- 
able number of horses are used in the army. The United States and 
Argentina rank next in the number of horses raised. 

Mules are not nearly so numerous as are horses. As mules are 
possessed of great strength and endurance, they are used for heavy 
work. The United States ranks ifirst, and Spain second, in the number 
of mules raised. In Italy, South America and Mexico large numbers 
of mules are employed because mules can be more successfully worked 
in warm climates than can horses. 

Asses are largely used as pack animals, although to some extent 
they serve as saddle beasts. Being sure-footed, they are used in 
mountainous districts where roads have not been constructed. The 
animals are cheap, and during the summer practically provide them- 
selves with food. Asiatic Turkey, India, Spain, Italy, France, 
South America and Mexico use many of these animals. 

Cattle were formerly used in large nimibers. They are patient 
and strong, but are too slow to be used in transportation, and in most 
parts of the world they are most valuable in furnishing a food supply. 
In South America, Mexico, our Southern States, and to some extent 
in the Old World, cattle are employed. 

309 



310 GEraQHAPHT 

The water bufialo, or carabao, is used in tilling the soil, and in a 
small way for transportation purposes, in India, Egypt, Siam, the 
Philippines and other hot, moist areas in the Orient, The animal 
will not thrive unless it can immerse itself in a pool of water several 
times daily. 

The elephant is a very useful animal in India, Ceylon, Burma and 
Siam. Elephants are used for transportation, and in Siam in par- 
ticular they are employed in piling logs and timber. 



The reindeer is as valuable in the arctic regions as is the camel 
in the hot deserts. The animal is swift of foot, requires compara- 
tively little attention, and is quite strong. In Norway, Sweden, 
Finland, Siberia and Alaska they are used for transportation purposes, 
and quite recently they have been introduced into Newfoundland, 
The flesh of the reindeer is eaten, its milk is used and its skin is 
converted into clothing and tents. 

Camels are all-important to man upon the hot deserts. This is 
because they can go without water for several days, can eat the thorny 
vegetation which grows upon deserts, and can carry lai^e toads. 

The dates grown upon the Saharan oases reach the Mediterranean 
ports of Africa upon the backs of camels, and Egyptian cotton is 
carried to the Nile by the same means. Tea and silk from China 



Draft Animals 311 

find their way by camel-caravan into Russia, and the only way of 
crossing the wastes of Arabia is on camel-back. In Egypt camels 
are used in plowing. Camels are now being used in transporting 
materials to and from the arid regions in western Australia. 

The llama i& related to the camel, although it is much smaller. 
It is of great value to the people who inhabit the lofty Andean 
plateaus. Before railroads penetrated these areas the llama fur- 
nished the only means of transporting the products of the mines 



Fiu. 134. — TrBOspurlatiuii by tcinilfwr. 

and in carrying the supplies to the plateau cities from the outside 
world. Llamas are used successfully at altitudes to which neither 
the horse nor the mule is adapted. They are sure-footed and 
require little food, but the load carried is small — seldom more than 
100 pounds. 

Dogs are found wherever man lives, but in few regions do they 
serve any other purpose than that of companions of men or guar- 
dians of their property. In Alaska, Greenland, Holland and Belgium 
dogs are employed as draft animals. In Alaska and Greenland 
it is impossible to use horses in. making long winter trips because 
sufficient food for the animals could not be carried. It is not so 
diflicult to carry food for dogs, and because of the nature of the food, 
some can usually be provided while on the trip. Dogs have played 



312 Geography 

a very important part in polar expeditions. In Holland and Belgium 
dogs are used in delivering milk and vegetables. During the World 
War much service was rendered by dogs. 

STUDIES 

Is the number of horses in the United States increasing or diminishing? Ex- 
plain. Why are mules less numerous than horses in our country? Why are 
there so few horses in China? Why does the camel take the place of the horse 
in certain desert areas? Why is the dog more useful than the horse on polar 
expeditions? Why is the llama so valuable in the high Andes? Is the elephant 
in danger of extermination? 

REFERENCES 

Austin, O. P.: "Queer Methods of Travel in Curious Comers of the World.'' 

Nat. Geog. Mag., vol. xviii, p. 687. 
LoMEN, Carl J.: 'The Camel of the Frozen North." Nat. Geog. Mag., 36:539. 

Dec. 1919. Shows how the reindeer is related to the inhabitants of 

arctic America. 
Yearbooks, U. S. Department of Agriculture. 



PART FIVE 

MINERALS IN THEIR RELATION TO MAN 

CHAPTER XXVIII 

I 

Minerals as Fuels 

General Statement — In countless important ways minerals in- 
fluence the present-day life of men. Coal, oil and gas have largely 
displaced wood as a fuel. The large buildings in our cities are gener- 
ally constructed of brick, concrete, stone and steel. Whether we 
travel by carriage, auto, trolley, train or steamship, the vehicle in 
which we ride is made in part of iron and steel. The tools with which 
the farmer, miner and mechanic carry on their daily work are made 
of the same materials. The money used in all parts of the world 
is in large part made of metal. Our writing is carried on by means 
of metal pens or machines, and overland and under-sea messages are 
flashed along wires. 

It is primarily her vast deposits of coal and iron that give Great 
Britian her important position in the affairs of the world. Germany 
and the United States owe their industrial greatness in large part 
to their enormous mineral wealth. The so-called precious metals 
have led to large movements of population, to the construction of 
roads and the rapid building of towns. California, South Africa, 
Alaska and western Australia are notable examples of areas the 
development of which has been strikingly influenced by deposits 
of gold. 

Minerals are known as metallic and non-metallic. Among the 
metals are: iron, copper, lead, zinc, tin, mercury, gold and silver. 
The non-metallic minerals are very numerous. Coal, petroleum, 
building stones, clay, salt and sulphur are illustrations, and are 
widely distributed. 

COAL 

General Statement. — Coal is one of the most valuable of natural 
resources. Owing to its great value as a fuel, it is extensively used 
in the heating of buildings. The trains which convey freight and 
passengers in all parts of the world are for the most part drawn by 
coal-burning engines. Coal is used upon the steamships that navi- 
gate rivers, lakes and oceans. In every city the smokestacks of 

313 



314 Geography 

manufacturing plants pour out their coal smoke. In countless ways 
coal is related to the daily lives of most people. The nations which 
are the most important in the production of coal are also the most 
important industrially. 

By partially burning coal, coke is produced. Coke is harder than 
coal, and makes a hotter fire. On. this account it is largely used in 
the smelting of iron. The gases which are given off in the production 
of coke are utilized in the manufacture of coal-tar, dyes and various 
drugs and chemicals. 

Origin. — That coal is of vegetable origin can be shown in several 
ways. (1) The woody tissue may be traced in the coal, either by the 
unaided eye or by means of the microscope. (2) Stumps of trees^ 
several feet in length and converted into coal, have been found up- 
right in the coal measures with roots in the underlying foundation. 
(3) In the peat bogs of today we see coal in the first stages of its 
formation. (4) Analysis of coal shows its vegetable origin. 

While the Carboniferous was the great coal-forming period, 
workable coal seams are found in the rocks of practically all ages. 
Coal is found in layers called seams. These vary in thickness from a 
few inches to many feet. The seams are separated from one another 
by layers of sedimentary rock, generally shale or sandstone, although 
limestone is sometimes found. From this we see that each coal seam 
must represent a time when the area was land, for on this basis only 
can the vegetation be accounted for. Each layer of sedimentary 
rock shows that the area was submerged, for in no other way can the 
existence of the rock be explained. In other words, there were many 
oscillations of the land during the coal-forming period. 

Was the vegetation of which the coal is formed drifted into basins, 
or did it grow in the situations where the coal is now found? If 
streams during floods carried trees into lakes or other depressions, 
and there left them, they would have been piled up. and consequently 
our coal deposits would not be so uniform in thickness as they are. 
Furthermore, these same torrential streams would have carried great 
quantities of sand and gravel, and hence the coal would be much 
more impure than it now is. It seems evident that the vegetation 
grew where the coal fields now exist, and the streams were, for the 
most part, slow-flowing, and hence carried fine sediment. In spite 
of this, some authorities believe that coal, in many cases at least, 
was formed from materials drifted to the locality. During the sub- 
mergence of the vegetation the salts such as potash were dissolved. 
It is because of this that coal ashes are of no value ag a fertilizer. 



Minerals as Fuei^ 316 

Because of the pressure and the heat resulting from the accumu- 
lation of sediments, the vegetable matter was greatly compressed 
and otherwise changed. A given thickness of coal represents about 
7 per cent, of the original thickness of the layer of vegetation which 
entered into the formation. Thus one foot of coal represents an 
accumulation of vegetable matter about fourteen feet in thickness 
This signifies a long period of time. 



During the process of coal formation hydrogen, oxygen and 
nitrogen are given off, with the result that at each successive stage 
in the process the relative amount of carbon is increased. The 
following table will make this clear. The figures used represent 
average conditions. 

TABLE 31. 

carbon HydrogeD Oxyfen Nitrogen 

Wood 50 6 43 1 

Peat 59 6 33 2 

Lignite 69 6.5 25 0.8 

Bituminous 82 6.0 1.3 0.8 

Anthracite 95 2.5 2.5 Trace 



316 Geography 

Distribution. — Although coal is quite widely distributed, three 
countries — ^the United States, <Great Britain and Germany — ^produce 
the bulk of the world ^s supply. Austria-Hungary, France, Russia, 
Belgium, Japan, China, India, Canada and Australia each produce 
considerable quantities. 

In the United States there are six coal fields: the Eastern, the 
Gulf, the Interior, the Great Plains, the Rocky Mountains and the 
Pacific. The first named produces about 75 per cent, of our coal and 
the interior field ranks second in importance. 

Production. — 

TABLE 32. 

Average Output op Leading Coal-Producing Countries for the Five- Year 
Period Ending With 1913. Short Tons. Round Numbers.^ 

. Country * Tons 

United States 512,600,000 

Great Britain 300,000,000 

Germany 265,000,000 

Austria-Hungary 50,000,000 

France , 38,500,000 

Russia and Finland 28,000,000 

Belgium 24,500,000 

World 1,325,000,000 

In 1868 the United States ranked third as a coal-producing nation, 
having but 15 per cent, of the world ^s supply to her credit. In 1872 
she took second rank and in 1899 first. The value of our total out- 
put m 1919 was, at the mines, about $1,500,000,000, and in amount 
it was about 40 per cent, of the world's output. 

TABLE 33. 

Average Annual Production of Coal in the United States. Five- Year 

Periods. Short Tons. Round Numbers.* 

Yearto Tons 

1880-1884 99,000,000 

1885-1889 128,000,000 

1890-1894 132,000,000 

1895-1899 211,000,000 

1900-1904 314,000,000 

1905-1909 432,0Q0,000 

1910-1914 542,000,000 

1919- (estimated) 600,000,000 

^ "Mineral Resources of the United States.' ' 

2 Compiled from "Mineral Resources of the United States." 



Minerals as Fuels 



317 



In the order of their importance the chief coal-producing states 
ranked in 1915 as follows: Pennsylvania, West Virginia, Illinois, 
Ohio, Kentucky, Alabama, Indiana and Colorado. Practically all 
of our anthracite coal comes from Pennsylvania, although New 
Mexico and Colorado produce small amounts. Modem methods 
of heating buildings have reduced the demand for anthracite coal 
in one direction. 

Mining. — Much of the work of handling coal in the United States 
is done by machinery, while in 
Europe hand labor is more largely 
employed. 

Drills operated by compressed 
air make holes in the roofs and 
sides of the chambers. Car- 
tridges exploded in these holes 
shake down great quantities of 
both coal and rock. Helpers 
place the coal on small cars. 
These may be hauled out by 
mules or electric motors, or car- 
ried up the shaft by an elevator. 

Under favorable conditions, 
horizontal tunnels or drifts can 
be run from the surface of the 
earth to the coal. This lessens 

the cost of production. When the coal lies far below the surface, 
shafts are sunk vertically to it, and drifts are run in various directions 
from the foot of the shaft. 

A miner is generally paid by the ton. The helpers are employed 
and paid by the miners. There were in our country, in 1916, 734,008 
persons employed in mining and handling coal. They averaged 
about 238 working days in the year. In the anthracite mines the 
miners averaged about 2.10 tons daily, and in the bituminous mines 
about 3.61 tons. 

The Coal Trade. — Our coal is shipped both by rail and water. The 
railroads have a controlling interest in the coal mines, and the amount 
of coal that, each road is to transport during the year is agreed upon 
beforehand. Many coal barges are floated down the Delaware, 
the Philadelphia market receiving a part of its supply in this way. 
Pittsburgh, our greatest coal market, receives about 25 per cent, of 
her coal by water, Boston and New England markets generally get 




Fia . 136. — Production of coal in the United 
States. Percentages by states. 19r4-1918 

inclusive. 



31S GEOaRAPHT 

most of their coal by water. Coal vessels are unloaded by oaehinery 
at a cost varying from eight mills to two cents per ton. 

Our leading coal centers are Pittsburgh, Philadelphia, Chicago, 
Toledo, St, Louis, Boston, Cleveland, Cincinnati and Milwaukee. 
The water rates on coal from Buffalo to Duluth and Superior are 
about 50 cents per ton. 



Pig. 137.— TraiiBportAtioi 



We consume 96 per cent, of our production of coal, and hence 
export a comparatively small amount. New York, Philadelphia and 
Mobile are our chief exporting centers. A smaller quantity is im- 
ported. Australia, New Zealand and British Columbia ship coal 
to California, and Nova Scotia furnishes New England a part of 
her supply. 

England is the world's greatest exporter of coal. No other raw 
material holds a larger pla«e in the exports of the country. Both 
Italy and Switzerland are practically without coal and hence import 
considerable quantities. France imports English coal. 

Cost — The cost of coal to the consumer depends upon the cost 



Minerals as Fuels 319 

of production and transportation, the number of hands which the 
commodity passes through and the relation between supply and 
demand. As a rule the mines in this country are not as deep as they 
are in European countries, hence our cost of production is lower. 
On the other hand, the haul is longer in this country than it is in 
some parts of Europe, varying from 100 to 200 miles. In England 
it does not average more than 50 miles. 

Peat, which is coal in the first stages of its formation, is quite 
widely distributed. It is dark in color, somewhat spongy in texture 
and clearly shows its vegetable origin. Ireland, which is poor in 
coal, is rich in peat, and great quantities are cut from the bogs, dried 
and burned. The same is true in Holland and Belgium. In Canada 
there are great areas of peat bogs. In our country, Wisconsin, 
Minnesota, Michigan, New Jersey, Florida and other states are 
rich in peat. In some states peat lands, when drained, produce 
excellent* celery. 

When peat has undergone further change, due to heat and pres- 
sure and the relative amount of carbon has increased considerably, 
it is called lignite. Coal of this character has, until recently, been 
considered practically worthless. The next step in the process gives 
us bituminous coal. This variety of coal is much more widespread 
than is anthracite or hard coal. 

History. — In his book on ''Stones,^' written about 315 B. C, 
the Greek philosopher Theophrastus mentions a substance that would 
kindle and that could be used by smiths. This was no doubt coal. 
In 1239 Henry III of England granted a charter for operations in the 
Newcastle field. The existence of coal in the United States was first 
reported by Hennepin in 1679, who observed it on the Illinois River 
near where the town of Ottawa, Illinois, now stands. It was first 
mined in Virginia about 1749, near Richmond. 

Waste. — ^The World War increased the demand for coal and 
drew our attention to the waste as well as to the extensive use of this 
fuel. Our coal deposits can not be replaced, hence we should use 
our supply thoughtfully. Millions of tons of coal are wasted in our 
country yearly because of improper firing. Much coal drops from the 
cars during transportation. Coal is wasted in making electric energy 
used in unnecessary display of electric signs in every large city. 
Coal may be saved by not allowing the winter temperature in our 
houses to rise above 68° F. 

Future Supply. — Much has been said and written regarding the 
future of the coal supply. That it will in time be exhausted is certain, 



320 Geography 

but that the time is far distant is equally certain. The increased use 
of petroleum and water power are in some sections decreasing the 
use of coal. China has great deposits of coal, which are for the 
most part untouched. 

Investigations carried on at the St. Louis Exposition have shown 
that lignite, when made into producer-gas and burned in a gas engine, 
has from two to three times as much value as a power producer as 
has coal. Ordinary coal in a steam plant yields less than 5 per cent, 
of its energy in the production of power. A producer-gas plant will 
yield 20 per cent. When it is understood that in Montana, North 
Dakota, New Mexico, Texas, and other Western States there are 
vast deposits of lignite, the tremendous importance of the investiga- 
tions referred to begin to be realized. 

The life of our coal supplies will be still further extended through 
the briquetting of the coal dust, sometimes called culm. Inmiense 
amounts of this material are now wasted. In Europe great quantities 
of briquettes are manufactured, and there are now a number of plants 
in operation in our own country. 

One of the very interesting facts regarding the coal industry 
in the United States is that for a long time the output has practically 
doubled with each decade. In 1850 our per capita consumption 
of coal was a trifle more than one-fourth of a ton per year. In 1920 
this was increased to about 6 tons. This is an index of our devel- 
opment as a manufacturing nation. 

The Coal Land Act, passed during Mr. Roosevelt's administra- 
tion, represents a tremendously important step in the conservation 
of our fuel resources. By virtue of this act land was set aside from 
entry pending its classification and valuation. This work was per- 
formed by the Geological Survey. The land is valued according to 
distance from a railroad, amount and quality of coal. The minimum 
is $10.00 per acre, and in some cases a valuation in excess of $400.00 
per acre has been fixed. The money derived from the sale of the coal 
lands goes into the Reclamation Fund. 

PETROLEUM 

History. — The use of petroleum is almost as old as civiliza- 
tion. The Babylonians soaked their bricks in oil and wrapped the 
bodies of their dead in cloths saturated with it. The sacred fires 
which centuries ago were kept burning along the shores of the 
Caspian Sea were probably seepages of oil which had been ignited. 
Petroleum has been known in our country for a long time. In 



MiNERAis AS Fuels 321 

early days people frequently collected it from the surface of streams 
or ponds and used it as a medicine. In 1852 some petroleum was 
distilled and burned in a lamp, and in 1859 the first oil well was 
sunk in Pennsylvania. 

Origin. — Because petroleum is found in rock, it is often called 
rock-oil. In fact the word petroleum means rock-oil, being derived 
from the Latin petra, rock, and oleum, oil. The necessary geological 



Fio. 138.— Petroleum well on fire. 

conditions are: (1) Aporousstratum to hold the oil; this is sandstone 
or shale. (2) Impervious layers above and below to prevent the 
escape of the oil. 

When the bodies of plants and animals decay, hydrogen and 
carbon are given off. If the bodies decay on the surface of the earth 
the gases, of course, pass into the atmosphere. Where this change 
takes place under the beds of sand or mud, hydrocarbons, as they 
are called, are saved— stored up for the use of man. Gas, oil and salt 
are often found in association. The gas b at the top, and the salt 
at the bottom. 

DistributioD and Production. — The leading petroleum-producing 



322 



Geography 



countries of the worid are the United States, Russia, Mexico, Ruma- 
nia, the Dutch East Indies and India. The world's output in 
1915 was, in round numbers, 427,500,000 barrels, of which the United 
States produced more than 281,000,000 barrels, or 65 per cent, of the 
total. Mexico's output has increased from 1,000,000 barrels in 1907 
to 33,000,000 barrels in 1915. 



TABLE 34. 



Rank of Petroleum-Peoducing States, Based on Quantity op Oil Marketed, 

1914 AND 1915 ' 



State 

California . 
Oklahoma . 
Illinois . . . 


Rank 
...1 

...2 
.. .3 


Barrels F 

100,000,000 
74,000,000 
22,000,000 
20,000,000 
14,000,000 


•er cent. 

37 

28 
8 
7 
5 


State 

Oklahoma . . 
California . . 

Texas 

Illinois 


Rank 

..1 

-.2 

3 

...4 


Barrels Per cent. 

98,000,000 35 
87,000,000 31 
25,000,000 9 


Texas 


...4 


19,000,000 7 
18,000,000 6 


Louisiana . 


...5 


Louisiana . 


..5 



During recent years the Western fields have increased their out- 
put enormously, but the Eastern fields have decreased in importance. 
In 1915 California and Oklahoma each produced one-third of the 
total output of. the United States, and more than was produced 
by Russia. The average price per barrel in 1915 ranged from about 
40 cents in California to about $1.58 in Pennsylvania. The most 
productive area is Kern County, California. This produced in 1915 
more than one-half of the total. 

Until recently it was thought that California oil could not be 
profitably refined owing to the fact that it is a low-grade oil. There 
are now a large number of refineries, however, and most of the kero- 
sene used in the state is manufactured near San Francisco. 

The average depth of the wells in the Kern River district is about 
1,000 feet, and the cost of an equipped well averages in the neighbor- 
hood of $5,000.00. It is estimated that the oil-bearing sands are 
about 20 per cent, petroleum, and as the sand is in places several 
hundred feet in thickness, there is an immense amount of oil in 
the state. 

Uses. — From petroleum, asphaltum, distillate, lubricants, kero- 
sene, gasoline, vaseline, paraffin, benzine and other things are pro- 
duced. Railroads operating in the western part of our country use 
oil as a fuel for locomotives almost exclusively. Less extensively it 
is used for the same purpose in all sections of the United States. In 



3 



U. S. Geological Survey. Petroleum in 1915, p. 567. 



Minerals as Fuels 



323 



addition to being less, expensive than coal, it is cleaner, and is less 
liable to cause forest fires than is coal. Some of the ships in our navy 
burn oil and others are being equipped to use it. 

Operation. — When a well is sunk into an oil-bearing stratum the 
oil can be pumped out. Sometimes, owing to pressure, the oil flows 
or gushes out. In the early days of the oil industry in Pennsylvania 
much oil was lost. It gushed from the* wells and flowed down the 
streams. Russell Hastings Millward states that an oil well near 
Tampico, Mexico, burned continuously from July 4, 1908, until 
August 30, 1908, causing a loss estimated at $3,000,000. 





Fig. 139 Fig. 140 

Fig. 139. — World's production of petroleum, 1916. Percentages by countries. 
Fig. 140. — Production of petroleum in the United States. 1912-1916 inclusive. 

By means of a derricky an iron pipe, inside of which there is 
a drill, is driven into the rock. The pipe may be nearly a foot 
in diameter at the surface of the well, but not more than two inches 
at the bottom. 

From the oil fields the petroleum is carried to the refineries on 
cars, ships or in pipe lines. A pipe line extends from Olean to New 
York City, a distance of 300 miles. One of the long pipe lines of 
the world extends from Bakersfield, California, to San Francisco, 
a distance of 278 miles. In our country the great refineries are in 
New York, Philadelphia, Buffalo, Cleveland and Chicago. We 
export much oil in tank ships. 

Baku is the center of the oil industry in the Caspian Sea district. 
The oil is used as a fuel on steamers plying upon the Volga and the 
Caspian Sea. It is also used on the railroads in that part of Russia. 



324 Geography 

A large amount is piped to Batum on the Black Sea. The line con- 
necting Batum with the Baku oil fields is about 450 miles in length. 

In the black shale rocks of our country we have a vast oil re- 
source with which we are now experimenting. The heating of these 
shales yields an oil, which if not identical with petroleum, is an 
excellent substitute. 

The oil shales are very extensive in Utah, Colorado, Wyoming 
and other Western States, and in the central part of our country there 
are very rich shale formations. It has been estimated that we have 
in these rocks a quantity of oil several times as great as our original 
petroleum resource. 

For several years Scotland, France and New South Wales have 
been exploiting their oil shales. During the World War Great 
Britain made extensive use of the oil obtained from the shales 
of Scotland. 

Among the many valuable products of petroleum is gasoline. 
As petroleum is heated a vapor is given off which, upon condensation, 
becomes gasoline, one of the important fuels of today. We depend 
upon this fuel in the operation of our automobiles, auto-trucks, air- 
ships and tractors. 

Every user of an automobile can help to conserve this precious 
fuel. If by careful driving we could save one pint of gasoline per 
auto per week, the total saving would amount to about 25,000,000 
gallons yearly. 

NATURAL GAS 

Natural gas is the result of the distillation of plant and animal 
life, and therefore is found associated with petroleum. Like petro- 
leum, the supply of natural gas, of course, is temporary. In the 
early days of the petroleum industry little attention was paid to 
natiu'al gas, and as it is often under enormous pressure, great quanti- 
ties have been allowed to go to waste. This was especially true in 
Indiana. 

Although natural gas is our most perfect fuel, it was not used 
extensively in manufacturing until recent years. Today it is largely 
employed in the glass and in the iron and steel industries, as well as 
for the purpose of illumination. 

The United States is the chief producer of the natural gas. The 
average annual value of our output for the five years ending with 
1915 was about $88,000,000. During this period there was a steady 
increase amounting to some 30 per cent. Russia, Italy, Canada, 
the United Kingdom and Hungary produce some natural gas. 



Minerals as Fuels 325 

TABLE 35. 
Value of Natural Gas Produced in the United States in 1915 * 

State Value 

West Virginia $36,000,000 

Pennsylvania $21,000,000 

Ohio $17,000,000 

Oklahoma $ 9,000,000 

California $ 4,000,000 

Kansas $ 4,000,000 

New York $ 2,000,000 

STUDIES 

Make a list of all of the materials used as fuel. What is the chief fuel in 
your locality? Where does the coal used in your vicinity come from? Trace 
the route or routes of shipment. Account for the presence or the absence of 
coal deposits in your state. How long is the coal supply of the world likely to 
last? Should our government control the coal industry? Why is California 
especially fortimate in having a large supply of petroleum? Why has there 
been such a great increase in the production of petroleum in our country dining 
recent years? Write a paper telling of such waste of mineral fuel as you have 
actually observed, and how such waste may be prevented? 

REFERENCES 

AiNswoRTH, Mitchell C: "Oil.'' 

Arbor, E. A. N.: "The Natural Hist-ory of Coal.'' 

Campbell, Marius R.: "How Long Will the Coal Supplies of the United States 

Last?" Nat. Geog. Mag.y vol. xviii, p. 129. 
Gilbert, Chester G., and Pogue, Joseph E.: "Petroleum: A Resource Inter- 
pretation." U. S. National Museum ^ Bid. 102, Part 6. 
Gilbert, Chester G., and Pogue, Joseph E.: "Coal: The Resource and Its 

Full Utilization." f7. S, National Myseuntj Bvl. 102, Part 4. 
Journal of Geography, vol. xii, p. 355. (Coal.) 
**Mineral Resources of the United States," Part II. 
Mitchell, Grey: "Our Coal Lands." Nat. Geog. Mag., vol. xxi, p. 446. 
Mitchell, Guy Elliott: "Billions of Barrels of Oil Locked Up in Rocks." 

Nat. Geog. Mag., vol. xxxiii, p. 195. 
Parker, Edith P.: "Checking Waste in the Production and Use of Coal." 

Lessons in Community and National Life. Community Leaflet No, 6. 

Nov. 1, 1917. 
RiES, Heinrich: "Economic Geology of the United States." Chapters I and 11. 
Van Hise, Charles R.: "The Conservation of the National Resources in the 

United States," pp. 1-61. 

* "Mineral Resources of the United States," 1915. Part II, -p. 933. 



CHAPTER XXIX 
Building Stones and Clay Products 

STONE 

General Statement. — For thousands of years stone has been 
used in the construction of buildings, and its use for this purpose is 
more general today than ever before. In some countries stone is espe- 
cially valuable because of a lack of timber. From the standpoint of 
permanency, stone has a great advantage over wood as a building 
material. Being fireproof, the rates for insurance on stone buildings 
are low, as only the furnishings can be destroyed by fire. Some kinds 
of stone take a polish which adds to the beauty of buildings con- 
structed of them. 

The kinds of stone most important commercially are limestone, 
granite, traprock, marble, . sandstone and slate. As the kinds of 
stone mentioned are widely distributed, and as their transportation by 
land is expensive, quarries are seldom operated far from the markets 
to be supplied unless they are situated close to navigable waters. 

Granite. — The value of the granite quarried in the United States 
in 1915 was about 24 per cent, of the value of our total output of 
stone for that year. Vermont, Massachusetts, California, Wisconsin, 
North Carolina and New Hampshire were the leading producers in 
that year. For the five years ending with 1915, the average annual 
value of the stone output of the United States was a little more 
than $78,000,000. 

Granite is an igneous rock which always contains feldspar and 
quartz and very commonly mica. It is resistant to weathering and 
takes a high polish, and is therefore very valuable as a building stone. 
The Congressional Library in Washington, D. C, and the Temple in 
Salt Lake City are examples of buildings made of granite. In addi- 
tion to its use as a building stone, granite is extensively employed in 
the construction of monuments, curbs and paving blocks, and is 
used PvS a ballast on roads, streets and railroads. 

Traprock is a basaltic rock, the chief uses of which are in the 
construction of roads and concrete, although it is also used for 
building purposes. The states most important in the production 
of this rock are California, New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, 
Massachusetts and Connecticut. 

Sandstone, a sedimentary rock, is widely distributed. It is 
326 



Building Stones and Clay Pbodocts 327 

inoi^aiiic in origiii, beii^ constructed from sand grains deposited 
in the water and chiefly produced by stream and wave erosion. The 
sand grains are bound together by a cementing substance. When 
this cementing substance b silica, the sandstone is durable. As the 
grains of sand are relatively heavy, sandstone is formed rather close 
to shore. Areas of sandstone furnish evidence of a change in position 
of land and water. New York, Pennsylvania and Ohio are important 



producers of sandstone. Besides being used for building purposes, 
sandstone is of considerable value in the manufacture of grindstones 
and whetstones. At Berea, Ohio, grindstones are made in lai^e num- 
bers because sandstone of the proper kind is available. 

Limestone.- — Our limestone output is more valuable than our gran- 
ite. Pennsylvania, Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, New York and Missouri 
are the chief producers. Like sandstone, limestone is a sedimentary 
rock, but it is of organic origin. From the ocean waters animals ob- 
tain lime which they build into their skeletons. When the animals 
die the lime in their skeletons is converted into limestone rock. 



328 Geography 

The large limestone area in the Mississippi valley shows that this 
part of our country was once covered by the sea. Limestone fre- 
quently contains fossils which throw much light upon the geological 
liistory of the earth. 

Limestone is used in the construction of buildings, as flags for 
sidewalks, in paving streets, in the manufacture oflime and as a furnace 
flux. When limestone is heated to a high temperature out of contact 
with the air, the carbon dioxide (CO2) is expelled and calcium oxide 
or conmion lime (CaO) is left. The presence of limestone close to 
deposits of coal and iron is very important. In smelting iron, layers 
of limestone are added because, when the rock fuses, the lime reacts 
with sand and silicates, forming a flux which floats, and in this way 
impurities are removed. 

Marble. — ^When limestone has become suflSciently changed 
(metamorphosed) by heat and pressure, it becomes a metamorphic 
rock knowii as marble. Marble takes a high poUsh and is therefore 
much used by sculptors and in the making of pillars and other orna- 
mental parts of buildings. It is much more easily damaged in quarry- 
ing than is limestone or granite and blasting is seldom resorted to. 

Italy has long been noted for her beautiful marble produced at 
Carrara. Although worked for 2,000 years there are large amounts 
remaining in these deposits. Europe draws her suppUes of the finest 
marble from the Italian quarries and the United States imports some. 

The Carrara quarries support about 75,000 people. As the rock 
is blasted, there is much waste. The expense of production is greatly 
lessened by the fact that the marble comes from a mouhtain side and 
gravity aids in getting it to the railroad which connects the quarries 
with Avenza, three miles distant. The marble to be exported goes 
to the ports of Leghorn and Genoa. 

In the United States, Vermont, Georgia, Colorado, Tennessee, 
New York, Alabama, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania and California 
are the chief marble-producing states. 

Slate. — Shale is composed of mud particles hardened and cement- 
ed and is another sedimentary rock. Slate is altered (metamorphosed) 
shale. Having the property of cleavage highly developed, slate is 
very useful as a roofing material. In addition to this, it is used in 
making blackboards, school-slates, flooring, wainscoting, vats, 
laundry-tubs, refrigerator shelves, mantels and table-tops. 

In the United States the chief use to which slate is put is in the 
roofing of houses. Pennsylvania and Vermont are our mosfr impor- 
tant producers. We export some slate to European countries. 



Building Stones and Clay Products 329 

clay products 

Traveling on a wet road or unpaved street is very disagreeable 
if clay be a plentiful ingredient of the soil. The adhesive quality 
of clay is so great that considerable quantities of it are lifted, when 
wet, by the feet of pedestrians and horses, and lai^er masses clii^ 
to the wheels of vehicles. When clay dries it hardens. 

Brick. — Thousands of years ago people learned to take advantage 
of the fact that clay can be moulded when wet and that it hardens 



when it dries. Crude bricks were fashioned and dried in the sunshine. 
These were then used in the construction of houses. This was a matter 
of great importance in the valleys of the T^is and the Euphrates, 
in the Holy Land and in Egypt, for in these places there was practi- 
cally no timber. The early Spanish settlers in California built their 
houses of sun-dried bricks. Such buildings were called adobe houses. 
They were also used in Utah to some extent, and in the drier parts 
of Mexico there are many today. 

Clay is the result of the decomposition of several minerals, par- 
ticularly feldspar. It is widely distributed, hence the clay industries 
are important in many countries. Clay is used in the manufacture 
of building-brick, fire-brick, paving-brick, pottery, drain-tiles, tiles 



330 Geography 

for roofing, sewer-pipe, and to some extent it enters into the manu- 
facture of paper. 

As related to manufacturing, clay owes its importance chiefly 
to the use of bricks as a building material. On account of the greater 
protection against fire afforded by the use of artificial stone and tile, 
as well as the fact that hollow blocks permit greater uniformity of 
temperature and do not conduct sound readily, these materials are 
to some extent displacing brick. 

At the close of the glacial period, great quantities of clay were 
left in a lake occupying what is now the lower Hudson valley. The 
presence of the clay on the one hand, and the growth of cities on the 
other, have made the region the chief brick manufacturing center 
in the United States. Brick works are scattered along both sides of 
the Hudson from New York City to Cohoes. The Hudson. affords 
cheap transportation, and this has its effect upon the price of brick 
in New York, which was, in 1915, only about $5.00 per thousand. 
The average price for the United States during the same year was 
$6.15, and for Wyoming $10.23. In 1920 prices were much higher. 

Illinois ranks high as a brick producer. The industry is largely 
localized in Cook County, the county in which Chicago is situated. 
About two-thirds of the output of the state comes from this one 
county, which rivals the Hudson district in importance. Pennsyl- 
vania, New Jersey and Iowa are important in the manufacture of 
bricks. The average value of the annual output of common bricks 
in the United States for the five-year period ending with 1915 was 
about $47,000,000. 

Table 36 shows in a striking manner the influence of clay deposits 
upon the building material used in certain cities. 

TABLE 36. 
Number of Permits for New Buildings in 1915.* 

City . Wooden Buildings Brick Buildings 

Boston '. . 1219 445 

Chicago (1911) .2240 6583 

Milwaukee 1729 329 

Minneapolis 3738 254 

St. Paul 1217 198 

New York 147 1087 

Philadelphia 190 10429 

Portland, Oregon 1966 77 

Seattle 3473 51 



1 



"Mineral Eesources of the United States," 1915. Part II, pp. 913-916, 



Y. 



Building Stones and Clay Products 331 

Pottery. — In the manufacture of pottery the purest form of clay, 
known as kaolin, is used. Ohio, New Jersey, West Virginia, New 
York, Pennsylvania and Indiana are the leading states in the pottery 
industry. Trenton, New Jersey, and East Liverpool, Ohio, are the 
chief pottery manufacturing centers in our country. The average 
value of our annTial output of pottery for the five-year period ending 
with 1915 was about $36,000,000. 

Much pottery is made at Limoges, France, because of the deposits 
of kaolin and clay close at hand. Holland, Belgium and Great 
Britain are large producers. The United States imports considerable 
quantities of pottery from these countries. 

The average annual value of the clay products manufactured 
in the United States for the five years ending with 1916 was about 
$175,000,000. Ohio, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Illinois and New 
York are the chief states in the industry. 

STUDIES 

What building stones are found in your state? What do the presence 
and the character of these rocks tell you as to the geological history of the area? 
Is brick extensively used in your vicinity? Explain. Name some parts of the 
world in which the use of pottery developed early. Explain. 

REFERENCES 

"Mineral Resources of the United States," Part II. 

Ribs, Heinmch: "The Economic GeoJogy of the United States," chapters 

iii and iv. 
Van Hise, Charles R.: "The Conservation of the Natural Resources of the 

United States," pp. 9&-102. 



CHAPTER XXX 
The Metallic Minerals 



IRON 

9} 



General Statement. — Iron, although not a ''precious metal, 
is the most valuable of all the metals. In very many important 
ways iron and steel enter into the daily lives of hundreds of millions 
of human beings. Articles made of iron and steel are used in almost 
every industry, and transportation and communication make large 
demands upon these useful metals. 

Smelting and Refining. — Iron is seldom found in a pure state 
but exists as an ore. Its chief forms are magnetite (Fe804), hema- 
tite (FesOa) and limonite (2Fe033H30). 

Iron ore is smelted in blast furnaces into which the ore, together 
with coke and limestone, is placed. The coke is, of course, the fuel 
and the limestone is used because the silica and other impurities 
which the ore contains unite with the Ume. The slag thus formed 
is much lighter than the molten iron and floats upon it. Owing to 
this arrangement, the iron and slag can be drawn ofif separately. 

The molten iron is run into moulds upon a sanded floor, forming 
cast iron, or pig iron as it is commonly called, or it may be at once 
converted into steel. Cast iron is brittle and steel is made by remov- 
ing most of the carbon from the iron. Sulphur and phosphorus 
are also objectionable in steel making. Hematite, containing least 
of these substances, is the most valuable in the manufacture of steel. 

The manufacture of steel was very expensive until Henry Besse- 
mer about 1860 discovered the Bessemer process. It is interesting 
to note that the discovery of a cheap method of making steel grew 
out of an attempt to produce a material which would be better suited 
to the manufacture of cannon than is cast iron. The esssential 
point in the Bessemer process is that air is blown into the molten 
iron. This, of course, means combustion within the iron and this 
bums out the impurities. 

The ancient Egyptians and the Greeks used iron. We find its 
use mentioned in the Bible. Until about the middle of the sixteenth 
century charcoal was used in smelting iron ore. In 1558 the English 
Parliament passed an act forbidding the felling of trees fpr this pur- 
pose except in certain parts of the country. The object was to 
332 



The Metallic Minerals 333 

conserve the timberand bring aboutthe use of coal. During the proc- 
ess of bringing about the change the iron industry suffered greatly. 

Distribution. — The United States, Germany, Great Britain, 
France, Spain, Austria-Hungary, Sweden and Newfoundland aic 
important producers of iron ore. There are large deposits in Brazil 
and China which are undeveloped. 

In order that the manufacture of iron and steel goods may be 
carried on economically, the iron and coal must be close together 



or else there must be water transportation for the ore. The ore 
is shipped because the amount of coal and hmestone used in smelting 
is greater than the amount of ore. 

The United States, Great Britain and Germany are the leading 
manufacturing countries and each has vast deposits of coal and iron 
so situated that they may be brought together cheaply. For the 
making of cutlery Great Britain imports iron ore of high grade from 
Spain and Sweden. 

For the five-year period ending with 1915 our average annual 
production of iron ore was about 61,500,000 tons. During the years 
1916, 1917 and 1918 this output was enormously increased. The 
chief states are Minnesota, Michigan and Alabama, the first named 
producing nearly one-half of the total output of the country. 

The ore in Minnesota and Michigan is far from coal, but there 
is cheap transportation to the great iron and steel manufacturing 
centers by way of the G reat Lakes. The iron ore in northern Alabama 



334 Geoorafht 

iasituatedclosetocoalandlimestone. Asaresultof this, andalso be- 
cause of the rapid development of the South, the iron and steel indus- 
try has assumed much importance in Birmingham and Bessemer. 
Growth and Industry. — The concentration of population in cities 
has so increased the value of land that taU buUdinga have Income 
a necesaity. To secure rigidity, durability and greater protection 
against fire, much iron and steel are used in their construction. Even 



Fia. lU.~Opea hearth steel lurnsce. 

in concrete buildings steel rods are used. The astonishii^ railroad 
expansion m many parts of the world and the change from wooden 
to steel ships have stimulated the manufacture of iron and steel. 
The invention of machinery along all lines to do the work formerly 
performed by hand has created a large demand for these metals. 
Preparations for war which are constantly carried on in all important 
countries call for large quantities of iron and steel and give employ- 
ment to many men. 

Centers of the Industry. — The great English district is in the 
central part of England, where coal is abundant. Here are located 
Birmingham, Sheffield and other cities. In Germany the chief dis- 
trict is along the lower Rhine, with coal close at hand. Pennsylvania 
is the leading state in our country, in part, of course, because it has 
deposits of iron ore, but chiefly because of its preeminence in coal, 



The Metallic Minerals 335 

the fact that the iron ore from the Superior region can be shipped 
to Pittsburgh cheaply, and that iron and steel are here near to 
great markets. 

In Pittsburgh and other cities in the immediate vicinity the iron 
and steel industry is of the first importance. In the Metropolitan 
District, of which Pittsburgh is the center, the value of the iron and 
steel goods produced in 1909 was 55.8 per cent, of the value of all 
of the products of the district and 23.4 per cent, of the value of the 
total iron and steel output of the United States for the same year. 

Steel ships are made at Newcastle, England; Glasgow, Scotland; 
Stettin, Germany; and Philadelphia in our country. In all of these 
cases we have the cities located upon navigable rivers, close to coal 
and within easy reach of iron ore. Locomotives are manufactured 
at Philadelphia, Trenton, Providence and Schenectady, and cars at 
Chicago, St. Louis, Philadelphia and Wilmington, Delaware. Steel 
rails are made in Birmingham, England; Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; 
Chicago, Illinois; and Gary, Indiana. 

At Birmingham, England, and in the Pittsburgh and Birmingham 
districts in our country, large quantities of structural steel are pro- 
duced. Chicago makes farm machinery and tools; Detroit, automo- 
biles; Essen, Germany, cannon; Lidge, Belgium, machinery; Troy, 
New York, stoves; Bridgeport, Connecticut, sewing machines, and 
Sheffield, England, and Solingen, Germany, cutlery. These are illus- 
trations of the magnitude of the iron and steel industry and of the 
many uses to which the metals are put. 

The World War made a great demand upon our iron resources. 
Steel ships, cannon, shells, machine guns, rifles, locomotives, automo- 
biles, airplanes were manufactured in great numbers. Our iron was 
mined more rapidly than ever before and our steel plants were 
operated night and day. The Delaware River came to be more impor- 
tant than the Clyde as a ship-building center. 

Copper. — TheTJnited States leads the world m the production 
of copper, her average annual output amounting to about one-half 
that of the world 's total. In 1850 the United States produced but 
1,000,000 pounds of this metal. The rapidly increasing use of elec- 
tricity has caused an enormous demand for copper used in the manu- 
facture of wire. 

For the years 1845 to 1915 inclusive, Montana has produced 31 
per cent., Michigan 27 per cent., Arizona 24 per cent., Utah 7 per cent, 
and California 3 per cent, of our total output of copper. Butte, 
Montana, and Bisbee, Arizona, are to a large extent dependent upon 



336 Geography 

the copper industry. In 1915 the average price of copper in the 
United States was about 173^ cents per pound. 

TABLE 37. 

AvEBAGE Annual Production op Copper fob the Four- Year Period Ending 

With 1913.^ 
Country Pounds (round numbers) Rank 

United States 1,162,000,000 1 

Mexico 133,333,000 2 

Japan 133,000,000, 3 

Spain and Portugal 119,750,000 4 

Australia 98,000,000 6 

Chile 78,000,000 6 

World 2,330,000,000 

TABLE 38. 

Average Annual Production op Copper for the Five-Year Period Ending 

With 1915.2 

State Pounds (round numbers) Rank 

Arizona 376,000,000 1 

Montana 274,000,000 2 

Michigan 200,000,000 3 

Utah 151,000,000 4 

Nevada 72,000,000 5 

United States 1,220,000,000 

Lead. — The leading lead-producing countries of the world in 
1915 were the United States, Spain, Germany, Mexico and Australia. 
The production of lead in our country from domestic ores has in- 
creased from about 18,000 tons in 1870 to 50,000 tons in 1915. 
During the eight years ending with 1913, the percentage of the world 's 
output contributed by the United States has not fallen below 27 
and in 1913 it was 32. 

The chief lead-producing states are Missouri, Idaho, Utah and 
Colorado. In 1915 Missouri produced more than one-third of our 
total output of lead. 

Lead is very commonly found in association with zinc or silver. 
Much of the commodity is used in the manufacture of white lead, 
shot, pipes and type metal. 

Tin was one of the attractions of the Cornish Peninsula even 
before the beginning of the Christian era. Comparatively few parts 

* "Mineral Resources of the United States," Part 1. 

* "Mineral Resources of the United States, 1915," Part 1, p. 666. 



The Metallic Minerals 337 

of the world produce tin today. The chief sources of supply are the 
Straits Settlements, Australia, New Zealand, the United States 
and Bolivia. 

Large quantities of tin are used in the tin plate industry. Tin 
plating consists in dipping sheets of iron into molten tin. This 
prevents rusting. 

The first tin smelter in the United States was established at 
Bayonne, New Jersey, after the opening of the World War. We import 
tin from Bolivia. 

Zinc in its crude form is called spelter. The chief sources of 
production are the United States, Germany, Belgium and Great 
Britain. In 1912 Missouri produced nearly one-half of our total 
output. Colorado, Montana, New Jersey, Utah and Kansas pro- 
duced smaller quantities. 

When zinc is combined with copper, brass is produced. Bronze 
is produced by combining tin and copper. Galvanized iron is iron 
coated with zinc to prevent rusting. Zinc is also used in the manu- 
facture of paints. 

Aluminum, because it is light and does not easily oxidize, is in 
demand for a variety of uses. To some extent it is employed in lining 
refrigerators and in the manufacture of mailing tubes and artificial 
limbs. It is used also in the electrical industry and in the manufac- 
ture of automobiles and kitchen utensils. 

Platinum is chiefly obtained from Russia, Colombia, the United 
States and New South Wales. As a very high temperature is required 
for its fusion and as it is not easily affected by acids, it is used in the 
manufacture of laboratory utensils. There is a demand for it in 
photography, dentistry and in the electrical and jewelry business. 
Its use in the setting of diamonds is increasing. In the United States, 
California and Oregon are the chief producers. 

Quicksilver. — This metal is usually found in the form of sulphide 
of mercury or cinnabar. The ore is roasted and the resulting vapor 
is hquefied. It is shipped in flasks holding 75 pounds each. 

For hundreds of years Spain has been an important producer. 
The other countries from which the metal is obtained are the United 
States, Austria, Italy and Russia. Most of the output of our country 
comes from California. 

Mercury is used to form an amalgam with gold so that the latter 
can be separated from impurities. Owing to its great density, 13.6, 
and its ready change in volume with change in temperature, mercury 
is used in thermometers, barometers and hygrometers. It is used in 

22 



338 Geography 

the manufacture of explosive caps, in combination with tin to coat 
the backs of mirrors, in medicine and for other purposes. 

Silver. — Although silver' is widely distributed, the bulk of the 
world's output is contributed by the United States, Mexico and 
Canada. Mexico has been a heavy producer of silver since the days 
of the Spanish conquest, but in the United States Uttle was mined 
previous to 1860. Much silver is obtained from gold, lead and 
copper ores. 

TABLE 39. 

Annual Value of the Silver Produced in the United States. Five-Year 
Period Ending With 1917. Figures in Round Nubibers.* 

Year Value 

1913 $40,800,000 

1914 40,000,000 

1915 37,000,000 

1916 44,000,000 

1917 61,000,000 

Average iEinnual value $45,560,000 

Nevada, Montana, Idaho, Utah, Colorado and Arizona produce 
about 75 per cent, of the total. 

' Silver, being harder and less beautiful than gold, is more generally 
employed in the arts than is the latter. Large quantities are used 
in the manufacture of tableware and plate of various kinds. Jewelry 
and coins which are small in value are made of silver. The price of 
silver varies in different countries and fluctuates more or less in a 
given country. The average value in the United States for the years 
1910 to 1917, inclusive, was 61 cents per fine ounce. 

GOLD 

General Statement. — Men endure the cold of the arctic regions, 
the fevers of the tropical jungle, the pangs of thirst upon the desert, 
and privations and dangers of many kinds in their search for gold. 
Countries have been settled, boundaries disputed, railroads built and 
cities founded because of the discovery of this metal. For many 
centuries gold has been used and highly prized. Its relative rarity, 
its beauty and the fact that it is easily worked have caused it to be 
classed as a precious metal. The value of an ounce of gold ($20.67 
in the United States) is as great as the average value of several 
barrels of flour or tons of coal. 

' Reports of Director of Mint, Treasury Department. 



The Metaluc Minerals 339 

As a result of the disintegration of gold-bearing rocks, Cne parti- 
cles and nuggets of gold occur. As gold is very heavy, these nuggets 
often are scattered in the pools of streams. It was in this form that 
James Marshall discovered gold in California in 1848. 

Processes. — Gold in the form of flakes and nuggets is called 
pZacer gold and is obtained by washing the sands and gravels of streams. 
In the early days pans were used in washing the gravels, but today 
sluices and dredges are employed. To the bottom of the sluices 
cross pieces are fastened and on the up-stream sides of these the 
particles of gold collect. 

Hydraulic mining consists in tearing down banks and hills by 
means of water under pressure. Much of this was done in Cali- 
fornia in early days and so much material was washed into the streams 
that it choked the channels, killed the fish, and in some cases spread 
a layer of sand and gravel over the adjacent land to the detriment 
of agriculture. Gold is also obtained by dredging in rivers and ofif 
shore and by washing desert sands. 

There is much gold in the form of veins in quartz rock where it 
has been deposited by hot, alkaline waters moving toward the sur- 
face of the earth. Gold-bearing rock, or ore, is mined and crushed 
by powerful hammers called stamps. The fine material is then 
passed over copper plates coated with mercury. The mercury and the 
gold combine, forming an amalgam, and the rest of the material 
is washed away. 

Distribution. — The distribution of gold in large quantities is not 
general, but as it is exceedingly valuable in proportion to its mass, 
transportation is not an expensive operation. A few countries 
produce the bulk of the world 's supply of gold. 

TABLE 40. 
Average Annual Production op Gold, 1911-1915 Inclusive.* 

Country Value Rank 

Africa $205,000,000 1 

United States 98,000,000 2 

Australia 52,000,000 3 

Russia and Finland 27,000,000 4 

Mexico 15,000,000 6 

Canada 14,000,000 6 

British India 11,000,000 7 

During the five-year period Canada showed a decided increase 
and Mexico a decided decrease in output. 



4 a 



Mineral Resources of U. S., 1915." Part 1, p. 771. 



340 Geography 

TABLE 41. 

Average Annual Production op Gold in the United States for the Five- 

Year Period Ending With 1917.'^ 

State Value (round numbers) Rank 

California $21,300,000 1 

Colorado 19,100,000 2 

Alaska 15,800,000 * 3 

Nevada 10,200,000 4 

South Dakota 7,300,000 5 

Arizona 4,400,000 6 

Montana 4,000,000 7 

Utah 3,600,000 8 

Idaho 1,100,000 9 

United States 92,000,000. 

The nine divisions mentioned above produced nearly all of the 
gold mined in our country during the five-year period. The total 
value of gold mined in the Appalachian region for the same period 
was only about $100,000. 

As pure gold is too soft to be durable, it is nearly always alloyed 
with copper or silver. Our gold coins contain one part of copper 
to nine parts of gold. Pure gold is seldom employed in the making 
of jewelry. There is a considerable demand for gold in connection 
with dentistry and photography.' 

Influences. — Gold has led to great developments in our Western 
States, in Alaska, South Africa and Australia. In each of these areas 
marked movements of population followed the discovery of gold. 
California's white population increased from about 12,000 in 1849 
to practically 100,000 in 1850. The agricultural development of the 
area, its admission as a state, and its railroad connection with the 
East came about much earlier than they would have had it not been 
for gold. Alaskan gold led to the building of the White Horse Pass 
and Yukon River Railroad. 

One of the great gold fields of Australia is situated in an arid 
region some 400 miles east of Perth. The mineral wealth could not 
be developed without transportation facilities and a water supply. 
A railroad was therefore built into the region, the towns of Cool- 
gardie and Kalgoorlie established, and a great aqueduct laid for the 
delivery of water. There are many similar illustrations of the 
influence of gold and other forms of mineral wealth upon human life. 

^Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1917, p. 231. 



The Metallic Minerals 341 

STUDIES 

Make a list of at least 100 articles into the construction of which iron or 
steel enter. How do coke and limestone enter into the iron industry? How 
is the iron industry in Minnesota related to her educational interests? Why 
is steel more valuable than iron? Explain how steel ships float. Write a paper 
on man's relation to iron. Name the uses of copper. What is the silver in a 
silver dollar worth? Show how the gold has shaped the history of some area. 
How will the economic geography of France be changed by the restoration of 
Alsace-Lorraine to that country? 

REFERENCES 

Dake, C. L.: "Iron." Jour, of Geog.j vol. xii, p. 165. 

Dakb, C. L.: **Gold." Jour, of Geog., vol. xii, p. 197. 

Hood, C.:" Iron.'' 

"Mineral Resources of the United States." Part I. 

RiES, Heinrich: "The Economic Geology of the United States," chapters XV, 

XVI, XVII, XIX. 
Showaltbr, William J.: "Industry's Greatest Asset — Steel." Nat. Geog. Mag., 

vol. xxxii, p. 121. 
Van Hise, Charles R.: "The Conservation of the Natural Resources in the 

United States," pp. 61-95. 



CHAPTER XXXI 
Miscellaneous Minerals 

SALT 

« 

Occurrence. — Common salt or halite (NaCl) is one of the 
necessities of life. It contains 39.4 per cent, of chlorine and 60.6 per 
cent, of sodium. Salt occurs in the crust of the earth in a solid form 
known as rock salt. Such deposits occur where an arm of the sea or 
an inland body of salt water has disappeared as a result of evapora- 
tion. Salt also occurs in the rocks in the form of brine. From each 
100 pounds of ocean water artificially evaporated, about three and 
one half pounds of mineral matter are obtained, most of which is 
common salt. The ocean is one of the chief sources of this mineral. 
Great quantities of salt exist in inland bodies of salt water, such as 
Great Salt Lake and the Dead Sea. Some few years ago it was 
estimated that Great Salt Lake contained 400,000,000 tons of salt. 

Distribution and Production. — Salt is widely distributed. The 
United States, the British Isles, Russia, Germany, India, France, 
Japan, Austria, Italy and Spain are all large producers. Near Cracow, 
Austria, are rich deposits of rock salt 1,200 feet in thickness. So ex- 
tensively is the salt mined that a small town exists hundreds of feet 
below the surface of the earth. Here are streets, stores, restaurants, 
a church and a theatre. The deposits belong to the government and 
have been worked for 1,000 years. 

The chief salt-producing states in our country are New York, 
Michigan, Ohio, Kansas, Louisiana and California. Our total out- 
put of salt, which in 1903 amounted to nearly 19,000,000 barrels, 
increased to more than 49,000,000 barrels in 1918. The value of 
the output was in 1918 more than $20,000,000. 

In the vicinity of Syracuse, New York, there are brines, and much 
rock salt also exists in the Mohawk valley. Near Saginaw, ^Bay 
City, St. Charles and Mt. Pleasant, Michigan, are deposits of a 
similar nature. Brines are pumped from a depth of more than 1,000 
feet in Weet Virginia and Ohio. There is a large area of rock salt in 
central Kansas and the Louisiana product is of the same nature. 
The salt industry in central California is favored by relatively high 
temperature, high percentage of sunshine, low humidity and a clayey 
soil which makes a good bottom for the pans. 

342 



• Miscellaneous Minerals 343 

The Industry. — Salt springs were determining factors in the 
location of some of the early settlements on the western side of the 
Appalachian Mountains. The long haul across the mountains made 
salt expensive in areas where it could not be produced. Hence the 
salt industry was one of the earUest to develop. In speaking of the 
early settlement of the Trans-Allegheny region a well known writer 
sajrs: "At first salt was imported at almost prohibitive prices; but 
soon the pioneer began to boil water from the saline springs which 
abounded, and later learned to bore for richer brine. At Bullitt's 
Lick on Salt River in Kentucky a regular industry was started, and 
suppUed the frontier communities from the Ohio to the Cumberland."^ 

The production of salt in New York has been an important industry 
for more than a century. Most of the wells in the Syracuse area are 
the property of the state, as the land was formed into an Indian 
reservation in 1797. The following statement taken from Adams's 
Geography, page 130, published in 1824, is of interest: "Salt springs 
are frequent in different parts of the state. The most noted are those 

between Oneida and Seneca Lakes Here are two 

towns, Liverpool and Salina, wholly occupied in making salt. . . . 
The water is drawn up from wells by hand and by horse pumps. No 
other salt is used in the country, and a great part of the States of 
Pennsylvania, Virginia, Ohio and Michigan Territory, as likewise 
the whole Upper and a considerable part of Lower Canada, are 
wholly supplied from these works. These springs are the property 
of the state. Boats come within 4 rods of the works.'' 

In some cases rock salt is mined. In other cases water is conveyed 
to it by means of pipes and the resulting brine pumped up. Much 
salt is obtained by evaporating sea water. Both solar and artificial 
heat are employed. Water from Great Salt Lake is pumped into 
wooden flumes, which convey it two miles to the ponds or pans. 
In the first of these the impurities settle. In the third the salt is 
deposited in a layer varying from two to six inches in thickness. 
About five months are required for the process. The salt is scraped 
up from the bottom of the pond and loaded on to cars. 

Commerce. — The cost of production, and therefore the cost to 
the consumer,depends upon the source from which the salt is obtained, 
the methods employed, the cost of transportation, and the attitude 
of the government toward the industry. Salt is a government monopoly 

^Semple, Ellen Churchill: '^American History and its Geographic Conditions/' 
page 82. 



344 Geography 

in Austria-Hungary, Italy and Turkey and as a result the commodity 
is expensive in these countries. The first cost of salt in the United 
States was in 1915 but $2.19 per ton; in Austria-Hungary it is more 
than $20.00. As a result, both production and consumption are 
relatively small in the latter country. 

The cheap production of salt in the United States has had an 
important effect upon the meat-packing industry. Owing to cheap 
labor and water transportation the West Indies and the Mediter- 
ranean countries are able to compete with New York in supplying 
New England coast cities with salt. As a result of the reduction of 
the tariff through the Payne-Aldrich bill to $1.40 per ton, imports 
will probably increase. In 1915 we produced 99 per cent, of the salt 
consumed in our country. Both Great Britain and Germany are 
exporters of salt. 

Uses. — In addition to the very universal use of salt in food as 
it is cooked and eaten, great quantities are used in packing and pre- 
serving fish, meat, hides, butter, pickles and hay. Farmers scatter 
it about in pastures for horses, sheep and cattle, and occasionally 
place it before stock during the winter. When mixed with ice, salt 
dissolves. The process of dissolving the salt requires heat. This 
principle is made use of in the manufacture of ice cream, for the 
dissolving of the salt used takes so much heat from the cream that 
it freezes. Salt is used in the manufacture of soda, glass, bleaching 
powder, pottery and in the refining of silver. 

SULPHUK 

Unlike salt, sulphur is not widely distributed. It is generaUy 
found in volcanic regions. The island of Sicily produces the greater 
part of the world 's supply. Japan and the United States are the next 
most important producers, in the order named. In our country, 
Louisiana contributes the bulk of the sulphur not obtained from 
iron pyrite. Utah and Wyoming produce smaller quantities. 

In Sicily the sulphur is sometimes piled up in heaps and ignited. 
' The melted sulphur is caught and allowed to solidify through cooling. 
There are about one thousand sulphur mines in Italy and Sicily, 
yielding more than one half-million tons annually. The sulphur 
deposits of Japan occur on a volcanic island some two thousand 
miles north of Tokio. At present a part of the product is shipped to 
the Pacific Coast of our country. 

In the southwestern part of Louisiana, near the town of Lake 
Charles, there is an extensive deposit of sulphur. It lies at a depth 



Miscellaneous Minerals 345 

of six to eight hundred feet and this, together with the fact that there 
are great deposits of quicksand above it, makes it expensive to obtain 
the sulphur. Pipes are driven to the mineral and through these 
steam is forced down. This dissolves the sulphur, which is then 
pumped out. It is run into vats, where evaporation takes place. The 
product is then shipped. A single well sometimes yields from 40C 
to 500 tons of sulphur daily. As the sulphur flows from the wells 
it averages more than 99 per cent. pure. A very large part of the 
product goes to Sabine, Texas, from which point it is shipped by 
water to various Atlantic ports. 

There are sulphur deposits in Utah, Nevada, California and Colo- 
rado, but these do not yield very extensively. Much sulphur in our 
country is obtained from pyrite. 

Sulphur has many uses, one of the most important being in the 
manufacture of gunpowder. It is used in medicine, in vulcanizing 
rubber and in drying peaches, apricots and other deciduous fruits. 

Sulphuric acid is used in the manufacture of glass, aniline colors, 
matches, kerosene, blue vitriol, green vitriol, alum and other things. 

Sulphurous acid enters into the making of paper pulp and is used 
in bleaching and in disinfectants. As we have to depend in part 
upon Italy for our supply of sulphur, there is no duty placed upon it. 

For the five years ending with 1914 our average annual produc- 
tion of sulphur was, in round numbers, 300,000 long tons, the average 
annual value of which was $5,000,000. There was a steady increase 
in output and value during the years mentioned. 

MINERAL WATERS 

For many centuries the waters of certain springs and pools in 
various parts of the world have been held in high repute because of 
their real or supposed medicinal value. The fame of these waters 
has led to the growth of towns and cities in their vicinity. Carlsbad, 
Austria; Baden, Germany; Vichy, France; Bath, England, and Sara- 
toga, New York, are examples. Among the peoples of ancient times 
the Egyptians, Greeks and Romans made much use of mineral waters. 
During recent years great quantities of mineral waters have beien 
drunk far from their places of emergence. The bottling, shipment 
and delivery of such waters is an industry of considerable importance. 

The term ''mineral waters" is somewhat misleading, as all ground 
water is more or less mineralized. The amount of mineral matter 
which water contains in solution depends upon the length of time 
which the water has remained underground, the temperature of the 



346 Geography 

water and the character of the rock with which it has been in contact. 
If the percentage of mineral matter in the water is miusually high, 
or if it is particularly noticeable because of color, taste or odor, the 
water is called mineral water. 

The average annual value of the domestic mineral waters sold 
in our country is about $5,000,000. More than 800 springs report 
sales. The average price per gallon at the springs ranges from one 
cent in Nevada to forty cents in Kansas. In 1915 the five leading 
states as to value of output were Wisconsin, New York, California, 
Maine and Virginia. In the value of medicinal waters California 
led, while Wisconsin held first place in the value of table waters. 

Diamonds. — Of the many precious stones the diamond is the 
most important. It is pure carbon, and is the hardest substance 
known. Because of their hardness, diamonds must be cut and poli- 
ished by means of diamond dust. Black diamonds, which are worth- 
less as gems, are used as tips for rock drills. 

Diamonds are found in. various parts of the world, including 
South Africa, Brazil and India, but South Africa is the chief diamond- 
producing area in the world. The diamond mines near Kimberley 
produce millions of dollars' worth of these precious stones yearly. 

The diamonds are obtained from a formation known as the 
"blue earth," and in some cases at least, appear to be in volcanic 
tubes. The diamonds are extracted from the dirt by a process 
of washing. 

The United States furnishes the greatest market for diamonds. 
During periods of financial depression the sale of diamonds naturally 
falls off. At such times many of the diamond workers in Amsterdam 
and Antwerp, the chief centers for the cutting and polishing of the 
stones, are thrown out of employment. > 

STUDIES 

What is the origin of the salt in the ocean? How many pounds of salt 
could be obtained by evaporating a ton of sea water? Is the water in rivers salt 
water? In what cities in the United States is there an unusually great consumption 
of salt? What are the chie uses of sulphur? Is all water mineral water? 

REFERENCES 

Dake, C. L.: "Salt." Jonir. of Geog., vol. xi, p. 285. 
liACY, Walter N. : "Salt in China." Jour, of Geog., vol. xii, p. 322. 
"Mineral Resources of the United States," Part 2. 

PoAQUE, J. E.: "Sulphur." Bull. 102, Part 3, U. S. National Museum, Nov. 1917. 
Williams, Gardiner F.: "The Diamond Mines of South Africa." Nat. Geog. 
Mag.^ vol. xvii, 344, 



PART SIX 

TRANSPORTATION AND COMMUNICATION 

CHAPTER XXXII 
Tkansportation by Land 

General Statement. — Modem life is absolutely dependent upon 
transportation and communication. For our daily food, for the 
clothes which we wear, for the materials of which our homes are 
constructed, for the countless manufactured articles used in all walks 
of life, for the means of getting to our daily places of business, we are 
dependent upon transportation facilities. When individual families 
and communities produced practically all of the essentials of life, 
transportation was not important, but the growth of cities, the 
specialization of labor and the development of areas far from markets 
make adequate transportation essential. 

For how many centuries human beings were their own burden- 
bearers is not known. In time the ox, dog, horse, camel, elephant, 
yak, llama and other animals were pressed into service. All of these 
animals are yet made use of, the horse the most extensively. 

With the invention of carts and wagons, the trails and paths 
used by porters and pack animals could not be employed. Hence 
these were widened and developed into roads. The Romans were 
the most celebrated road builders of ancient times. Their roads were 
chiefly used as a means of binding together the different parts of the 
empire. Some of these roads, both in Great Britain and upon the 
mainland of Europe, are today followed by railroads. When the 
Spanish first visited Bolivia and Peru they found that the natives 
had constructed good roads through the mountainous regions. These 
roads, like those built by the Romans, were for military purposes. 

Early Roads in the United States. — In the United States the 
Appalachian Barrier confined settlement to the Atlantic Coastal 
Plain for a long time. As this region is well supplied with rivers the 
needs of the people were fairly well met by water transportation. 
When the great domain lying west of the Appalachian Mountains 
was made known by hunters, trappers and traders, there began the 
westward expansion of our population. 

For a time the settlers crossed the mountains on foot or horse- 
back, but the necessity for roads steadily increased. Then as now, 

347 



348 Gex)grapht 

the easiest grade was found by following the Hudson-Mohawk route, 
and a wagon road was constructed along this old war trail. 

In the year 1753 George Washington made a trip on horseback 
from Williamsburg, Virginia, to Fort le Boeuf, near where Erie, 
Pennsylvania, now stands. The journey required 42 days. At the 
present time the trip can be made in less than a day. 

For a time the government did some road building. The "Old 
Cumberland Road" was commenced in 1811 and opened to Wheel- 



ing, Virginia, in 1818. As surveyed, the route was about 700 miles 
in length, connecting Cumberland, Maryland, with Jefferson City, 
Missouri. It was in part 'completed to Vandalia, Illinois. The 
pohcy of government road building was soon discontinued and the 
work in large measure fell upon companies. This involved the levy- 
ing of tolls and such roads were called "toll roads." 

Wagon Roads of the Present Day. — Wagon roads are of tremen- 
dous importance even in this age of railroads, for they are the feeders 
of the railroads. The load which a horse can draw depends upon the 
grade and upon the nature of the roadbed. As the character of 
the road determines, in large measure, the cost of marketing com- 
modities, people have in recent years given much attrition to the 



Transportation by Land 349 

improvement of roads. 8ome country roads are graveled, some oiled 
and some macadamized. 

In 1916 there were in the United States more than 2,000,000 mile^ 
of wagon roads and 10 per cent, of the total mile^e was improved. 
In the same year we had about .75 mile of road to each square mile of 
area, and one mile of road to 41 inhabitants. The, people of the United 
States spent upon their roads in the year 1916 alwut $250,000,000. 

Great Britain, Germany and France have excellent roads, but 
Russia is very deficient in roads. The season during which roads ■ 
can be used by wagons in Russia is short, especially in the north, and 
during a part of this time the land is so wet as to make the roads 



practically impassable. Another reason for poor roads is the lack 
of good road-building material. Then again, the people are"poor and 
the government has not encouraged road building. 

China also is lacking in roads. This is chiefly due to the fact that 
the very dense population makes it difficult to produce the food 
necessary for draft animals. The most dense population is found 
upon the great plains, and here navigable rivers and canals serve as 
routes for transportation. Upon land, porters are largely employed 
and the wheelbarrow is extensively used. 

Railroads. — The application of steam to transportation has 
revolutionized industry and commerce and led to the rapid settlement 
and development of new areas. Macaulay says: "Of all inventions, 
the alphabet and the printing press alone excepted, those inventions 
which abridge distance have done most for civilization." 



350 Geography 

• 

A locomotive was first employed in Great Britain about 1804 
for the purpose of hauling coal from the mines. This locomotive 
was made by Richard Trevithick. In the year 1826 George Stephen- 
son ran a train carrying both coal and passengers at the rate of 15 
miles per hour. As early as 1829 passenger trains were used in Eng- 
land between Liverpool and Manchester. 

The first railroad was constructed in the United States in 1826. 
In 1853 one could travel from the Atlantic coast to Chicago without 
change. It was not until 1869, however, that California was connected 
with the Mississippi valley and the East by rail. The marvelously 
rapid development of railroad building in the United States is shown 
by the following table: 

TABLE .42. 
Miles of Railroad in the United States.* 

Years Miles 

1830 23 

1840 2,818 

1860 9,021 

1860 30,626 

1870 52,922 

1880 93,262 

1890 167,191 

1900 198,964 

1910 249,992 

1916 ' 266,031 

In 1918 the United States had about one-third of the total rail- 
road mileage of the world. The relation between railroad mileage 
and area in certain countries is shown by Table 43. 

TABLE 43. 
Relation Between Railroad Mileage and Area' 

Miles of road 
Country to 1,000 square mile 

Belgium 479.3 

Switzerland 224.0 

United Kingdom '. 195.2 

Giermany 189.6 

Denmark 164.2 

Holland 160.1 

France 154.8 

Austria-Hungary 112.3 

United States 77.3 

^Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1917, p. 297. 
^Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1917, pp. 772, 773. 



Transportation by Land 351 

MileB of road 
Country to 1,000 square miles 

Spain 53.6 

Russia 6.9 

China 1.5 

World 721,397.0 

When we compare mileage and population, the United States 
outranks Belgium. 

Improvements in Railroad Transportation. — Cost, speed and 
safety are the three vital factors in transportation. In 1876 it cost 
16.50 cents per bushel to ship wheat by rail from Chicago to New York. 
In 1917 the cost was 9.18 cents. In 1837 the average cost per ton- 
mile in the United States was 7M cents. In 1905 this had fallen to 
.80 and in 1916 to .71 cent. The decrease in cost is due to the 
lowering of grades, the elimination of curves, to the increase in the 
load hauled by one engine and to competition. 

The increase in speed is of vast importance in marketing fruits, 
vegetables and milk. Rapid transportation makes it possible for 
people in the Central and Northeastern States to enjoy fresh fruits 
and vegetables grown in Florida. Very rapid fruit specials are run 
from California to the East, carrying oranges. These trains average 
about 13 miles per hour. It should be remembered that much of the 
country crossed is very mountainous. Rapid transportation as 
applied to the milk supply can hardly be overestimated. 

Increased safety is of great importance. Better roadbeds, more 
substantial cars, improved couplers, airbrakes, a better service in 
dispatching trains, double track and more intelligent employees 
have resulted in a decrease in loss of life and property. 

In 1916 the railroads in our country carried about 2,200,000,000 
tons of freight. There were more than 2,000,000 freight cars in use, 
the average capacity of which was 40 tons. This shows the impor- 
tance of railroad transportation. Without this system, land far 
removed from the great centers of population would be practically 
valueless, for crops could not be marketed at a profit. Our railroads 
are important in the transportation of people as well as freight. 
In 1850 the population of the United States was 23,191,876. In 
1920 it had grown to about 110,000,000. In addition to this great 
increase in population, there has been an increase in the niunber 
of miles traveled per capita. Travel on account of business, health 
and pleasure has increased enormously. 

Routes and Topography. — Topography has played an important 



352 Geography 

part in guiding the construction of railroads in all countries. The 
relationship is, of course, much more important in mountainous than 
in level countries. Although the passes across the Appalachians 
are not high, they are factors of no slight consequence. The New York 
Central and Hudson River Railroad has the lowest pass, the altitude 
being about 445 feet. 

Across the prairies and plains roads were built with little regard 
to surface features. On reaching the foothills of the Rocky Moun- 
tains, however, valleys guided the routes. For a considerable dis- 
tance the Southern Pacific follows the "Gila Trail.'' Similarly, the 
Santa F6 follows the trail of the same name, the Salt Lake Road the 
"Spanish Trail," the Central Pacific the "California Trail," and the 
Oregon Short Line the "Oregon Trail." 

TABLE 44. 

Total Lift for East- and West-Bound Trains Between the One Hundredth 

Meridian and the Pacific Coast. ® 

no;if^a^ Miles from 100th meridian Lift west- Lift east- 

naiiroaa ^^ ^j^^ Pacific Coast bound bound 

Great Northern 1,362 7,021 ft. 8,588 ft. 

Northern Pacific 1,510 7,082 8,962 

Union Pacific 1,541 10,978 13,460 

Santa F6 1,749 15,066 17,546 

Southern Pacific 1,798 10,759 11,756 

Chicago, Milwaukee end 

Puget Sound 1,390 11,202 12,861 

The Union Pacific was opened in 1869, the Southern Pacific in 
1882, the Northern Pacific and the Santa F6 in 1883 and the Great 
Northern in 1893. The difiiculties in constructing our transconti- 
nental roads were enormous. We lacked equipment. Much of the 
region was poorly provided with water and Indians were a source of 
danger. Vast sums of money were necessary and dividends could 
not be paid for years, since the railroads must bring in the popu- 
lation and create the business. Because of these conditions, the 
government gave great tracts of land to each of several trans- 
continental railroads. 

The Atlantic and the Pacific coasts of Canada are now connected 
by rail, as are the same coasts of the Russian Empire. The English 
are building a road across Africa from Cape Town to Cairo. 
Construction is progressing from both the north and the south, but 

^Parkins, A. E.: Jour, of Geog., vol. viii, p. 109. 



Transportation by Land 353 

there yet remains a long gap in the central part of the continent. 
Recently a railroad was finished from Perth, AustraUa, to Port 
Augusta. It is now possible to travel by rail from Perth to Towns- 
ville, a distance of about 4,000 miles. The eastern and the western 
coasts of South America were connected in 1910, when the Transan- 
dine Railroad was opened. This road connects Buenos Aires and 
Valparaiso, and the trip between the two points can be made in 
about 40 hours. 

Cities have special transportation problems. The congestion 
upon the streets has led to the construction of both elevated roads 
and subways in a few cities. In both city and country electric cars 
are used in great numbers. These have done a great deal toward 
solving the transportation problem for those whose business is in a 
city and whose residence is in the suburbs. One can now make long 
as well as short trips by means of electric cars. 

In considering the problem of transportation by land, the auto- 
mobile must not be omitted. It has been a prominent factor in 
revolutionizing country life and much of the trucking in cities, as 
well as the transportation of passengers, is done by auto-vehicles. 
Automobiles are now used upon the deserts in the western part of 
our country and upon the Sahara, thus greatly reducing the danger 
on account of water shortage. Auto- vehicles played an important 
part in the great war which began in 1914. Good roads led to an 
increased use of automobiles, and on the other hand the use of auto- 
mobiles has done much to bring about better roads. In 1920 it was esti- 
mated that there were some 10,000,000 automobiles and auto-trucks 
in the world, about three-fourths of which were in the United States. 

STUDIES 

Why have toll roads and toll bridges practically gone out of existence? 
How do good roads contribute to the development of an area? Why has so much 
attention been given to good roads in recent years? Compare the milea^ of 
railroad per unit of area in Belgium and Holland. Account for what you find. 
Has government ownership of railroads been a success? What industries are 
largely dependent upon railroads? Show how wagons and railroads are guided 
by surface features in your vicinity. Make a study of road improvement in your 
state. Is the Federal Government aiding in road construction in your vicinity? 

REFERENCES 

Haltenberger, Michael: Primitive Carriers in Land Transportation." Bull. 

Am. Geog. Soc.j vol. xlvii, p. 729. 
Parkins, A. E. : ''Transcontinental Lines of the West." Jour, of Geog., vo\.vm, 

p. 97. 

23 



CHAPTER XXXIII 

Inland Waterways 

General Statement — ^At a very early period man commenced 
•to make use of streams as routes of trade and travel. Their use 
preceded the construction of roads, and their importance steadily 
increased until the era of railroad building began. Vast sums of 
money have been spent on river improvement and on canal construc- 
tion. Inland waterways are prominent factors in the economic 
geography of many countries, but so great is the importance of time 
in the affairs of the world today, that practically all of the passenger 
and much of the freight business has been taken over by the railroads. 
Bulky and non-perishable commodities are the only ones shipped 
extensively by inland waterways. 

Inland Waterways in North America. — Rivers as trade routes 
are treated in Chapter XI, hence the present chapter will deal 
especially with canals. According to the report of the Inland Water- 
ways Commission there are in the United States 295 navigable 
rivers, and more than. 26,000 miles of navigable river waters, and 
much improvement is contemplated. The Mississippi a^d its 
tributaries furnish more than 13,000 miles of navigable waters. 
The commission above referred to attempts to maintain between 
New Orleans and St. Louis a channel 250 feet wide and 9 feet deep. 
The Hudson, although short, is a waterway of great importance. 
None of the rivers west of the Mississippi is as yet of great commer- 
cial value. More than 4,000 miles of canal have been constructed 
in our country, much of which has gone into disuse. The Erie Canal 
(now Barge Canal), which has been recently improved at enormous 
cost, is of great importance because it connects the Great Lakes 
with the navigable Hudson. The Chicago Drainage Canal is of 
sufficient size to admit large ships, but will be of little conunercial 
value Xintil the Illinois and the Mississippi Rivers have been deepened. 
Two canals of some importance cross the State of Ohio, connecting 
Lake Erie with the Ohio River. All these waterways are treated 
elsewhere. The Panama Canal, one of the greatest waterways in 
the world, is discussed in Chapter L. 

The value of the St. Lawrence is enormous, because it and the 
Great Lakes afford a deep-water route between the heart of the conti- 
ment and the Atlantic seaboard. The Sault Ste. Marie Canals 
354 



Inland Waterways 355 

connect Lake Superior and Huron. One of the canals is a Canadian 
waterway and the other belongs to the United States. Both canals 
carry a very lai^ tonnage, although they are ice-bound for about 
half of each year. The canal belonging to our country is the more 
important of the two. The Welland Canal, by means of which 
Canada's lake commerce is carried around the Niagara Falls, con- 
nects Lakes Erie and Ontario, It has a depth of 14 feet. A canal con- 
necting Georgian Bay and the Ottawa River has long been a proposed 
improvement. This would greatly decrease the distance between 
Lake Huron and the Atlantic coast. 



Inland Waterways in Europe. — Although the area of the British 
Isles is much less than that of Montana, more than 3,000 miles of 
canal were constructed, chiefly before the era of railroad building 
began. Much of this mileage is now in disuse. 

The Manchester Canal is one of the important canals of the world, 
although only 35J/^ miles long. It follows the Mersey River, and con- 
nects Liverpool with Manchester. A great deal of raw cotton is 
shipped by this canal. The long estuary of the Humber and the 
relatively slight relief of the country made it possible to connect 
Liverpool and Hull by canal. 

France is well supplied with navigable rivers, and because of 
favorable surface conditions many canals have been constructed. 
About one-fourth of the internal trade of that country is carried on 
by means of inland waterways. As the canals are for the most part 
controlled by the government, the rates are low. 



356 Geography 

By means of the Canal du Midi, 150 miles in length, the Garonne 
and the Rh6ne are connected. Although the cuial is shallow, it cai^ 
ries considerable tonnage. All of the large rivers are united by canals, 
and several of the rivers of France are connected with the Rhine. 



Belgium and Holland are very important commercially. This, 
and the flatness of the countries, have led to the building of many 
canals. These, and the navigable Meuse, Scheldt and Rhine, cany 
a very lai^c tonnage. 

Western Germany is a plain drained by navigable rivers which 
are connected by a network of canals. In Germany there is no 
antagonism between rail and water routes, for both, in large measure, 
are in the hands of the government. 

The Rhine is the most important waterway in Europe. Large 
sums have been spent in deepening it and in reducing curves. On 
the average navigation is interrupted annually for only 6 weeks. 
Ah has been shown, the Rhine is connected with several other 



Inland Waterways 357 

important rivere, and its value is increased by the fact that it 
traverses a region in which there is much industry. 

Of the many canals of Germany, the Kiel Canal may be men- 
tioned. This crosses the base of the peninsula of Jutland, and affects 
a saving of two days between Baltic and North Sea f)orts of Germany. 
The canal has military as well as commercial importance. 

Much of Russia is a plain, and as a result many of the rivers 
have low gradients, and are navigable for long distances. Numerous 
canals have been constructed, and others are contemplated. The 
long, severe winters greatly lessen the value of the waterways. The 
vSt. Petersburg and Kronstadt Canal, which was opened in 1890, 
gives Petrograd water connection with its port. 

Inland Waterways in Africa. — All of the great rivers of Africa 
are obstructed by rapids in their lower courses, although navigable 
in their middle courses. On this account transportation between 
the coast and the interior is much more expensive than it would 
otherwise be. As the continent has experienced comparati\ely little 
industrial development, not much attention has been given to the 
improvement of the waterways. The Nile affords the easiest means 
of reaching the interior by water, although the navigation of this 
river is hindered by rapids. 

In 1869 the land bridge which for ages had united Asia and Africa 
was severed by the opening of the Suez Canal. The length of the 
canal is 87 miles, about 20 of which are in Great Bitter Lake and 
other bodies of water. At the Mediterranean end of the canal is 
Port Said, and at the southern extremity Suez is situated. The Suez, 
unlike the Panama Canal, is a sea-level waterway. It has a depth 
of about 28 feet, which enables it to accommodate ships of large size. 
Through the use of a system of block signals and electric lights, the 
canal is used by night as well as by day. Owing to the mild climate, 
the canal is used at all times of the year. 

The opening of the canal immediately diverted much com- 
merce from the Cape of Good Hope route, because it shortens by 
thousands of miles the distance between western Europe and the 
Far East. As England carries on an extensive commerce with 
India, Australia, and New Zealand, the canal is of special importance 
to that country. 

Inland Waterways in China. — The great plain of China is traversed 
by navigable rivers, and the people have constructed many connect- 
ing waterways. In part because of the large numbers of persons to 
the square mile, there are few horses, hence few roads. This gives 



358 Geography 

an added importance to the waterways. The longest of the canals 
is the Grand Canal, which connects Ningpo with Tientsin. 

Inland Waterways in Australia. — Australia is so deficient in 
rainfall that there is in the entire continent but one river (the Murray- 
Darling) which is of any considerable value from the standpoint 
of navigation. This is the one continent in which inland waterways 
can never assume much importance. 

Inland Waterways in South America. — South America has three 
magnificent river systems: the Orinoco, the Amazon and the Parana. 
These rivers and their tributaries have already been of much value 
in the development of the continent. As the era of railroad building 
had commenced before South America began to develop extensively, 
little attention has been given to the improvement of waterways. 

STUDIES 

Give several reasons why transportation by inland waterways is cheaper than 
transportation by rail. Why has more attention been given to inland waterways 
in Europe than in the United States? Explain the purpose of locks, and show 
by means of a diagram how they work. Make a study of the nearest navigable 
river or canal. 

REFERENCES 

Anderson, George E.: "The Wonderful Canals of China.'* Nat. Geog. Mag.y 

vol. xvi, p. 68. 
Austin, O. P.: "The Great Canals of the World." Dept. Commerce and 

Labor, Washington, D. C. 
Gause and Carr: "The Story of Panama." 
HuLBERT, Archer B.: "Great American Canals." 
Jour, of Geog. J vol. xiii, p. 137: "The New York State Barge Canal." 
Jour, of Geog.j vol. vii, p. 117: "The Manchester Ship Canal." 
Nat. Geog. Mag.y vol. xvi, p. 475. 
ScHOPP, Wilfred H.: "The New York State Barge Canal." BvU. Am. Geog. 

Soc.y vol. xlvii, pp. 321, 498, 593. 



CHAPTER XXXIV 

Ocean Transportation 

General Statement — For untold centuries the sea was an abso- 
lute barrier to the movements of man. He could creep along the 
shore in boats propelled by oars, but he dared not venture beyond 
the sight of land. As early as 1500 b. c, however, the Phoenicians 
were freely navigating the Mediterranean Sea. These people origi- 
nally occupied a narrow strip of country at the east end of that sea, 
and the numerous islands and slight tidal range favored the develop- 
ment of ocean navigation. About 1,000 years before the beginning 
of the Christian era the Greeks became noted as a seafaring people. 

The invention of the keel and the mariner's compass did much 
to encourage, and make safe, long voyages. The use of steam has 
revolutionized ocean travel. Columbus was 70 days in making his 
first voyage to America. In 1819 the steamship Savannah was 22 
days in making her first trip from the city of the same name to Liver- 
pool. Today it is possible to make the trip from New York to Liver- 
pool in five days. A trip around the world is no longer considered 
an imusual thing, and traveling upon the sea is safer than traveling 
upon the land. 

Ocean Routes. — Land routes of travel are largely determined 
by topographic features. Other things being equal, the greater the 
lift between two points the greater the cost of transportation. Upon 
the ocean there are no grades to be overcome. Configuration, how- 
ever, is an important factor. The fact that North and South America 
were united by a land bridge, as were Asia and Africa, necessitated 
long voyages around Cape Horn in the one case and the Cape of 
Good Hope in the other. The opening of the Suez Canal in 1869 and 
the Panama Canal in 1914 brought about great changes in ocean 
routes and hence in cost of transportation. 

Before the days of steamships, the prevailing winds were quite 
important in shaping routes. It was customary to make the voyage 
from northeastern Africa to India during the summer season and 
thus take advantage of the summer monsoon. The return trip was 
made in the winter, when the northeast monsoon would drive the 
ship homeward. Today the winds are not important factors in 
determining ocean routes. 

359 



360 Geography 

Similarly, ocean currents exerted a marked control. Ships sailing 
from Europe to the United States often sailed southward along the 
west coast of Africa until the trade wind belt was reached. From 
this point the winds and the equatorial current both drove the ship on. 

Although waves do not determine routes of travel, they are defi- 
nitely related to the movements of vessels. Ordinarily, even during 
storms, the distance between adjacent wave crests or troughs is not 
over 600 feet. Vessels more than 600 feet in length do not therefore 
pitch and roll as much as do shorter ones. Partly on this account 
the tendency is to construct ships much longer than they were a few 
years ago. 

When oil is poured upon the surface of the water it forms a 
film between which and the wind there is much less friction than 
there is between the wind and the water. This is why oil lessens the 
height of the waves. The large ships of the present day carry oil 
for this purpose. 

Temperature plays a part in modifying ocean routes. During 
the summer icebergs drift southward in the North Atlantic Ocean 
and are a menace to ships. At this season, vessels, as a rule, adopt 
a course south of the winter route. During the winter the northern 
routes are free from ice. On account of ice, many harbors are 
closed for several months at a time and this results in a temporary 
change of routes. Montreal, for example, is ice-bound between 
December first and May first. During this time Halifax, Nova 
Scotia, and Portland, Maine, secure the conamerce which would other- 
wise pass through Montreal. 

Determining Position at Sea. — Upon the open ocean there are 
no landmarks. Because of this, it was hazardous, before the days 
of the mariner's compass, to venture far from land. Exact location 
at sea is determined by ascertaining the latitude and longitude 
of the ship. 

The captain or other officer makes daily observations and records 
the latitude and longitude of the vessel. If a ship is met or passed, 
the position is noted. Should a rock, shoal or island not charted be 
discovered, its position is recorded. 

At sea latitude is usually obtained from the sun by means of an 
instrument known as the sextant. At the instant when the sun ip 
on the meridian the altitude of the former is taken. Tables show the 
declination of the sun, that is its distance north or south of the 
celestial equator. If the observation is being taken in the northern 
hemisphere and the sun 's declination is south, the amount of declina- 



Ocean Transportation 361 

tion is added to the altitude of the sun and the result subtracted from 
90°. This gives the altitude of the position. North declination is 
subtracted from the altitude. When observations are taken south 
of the equator, declination south is subtracted and declination north 
is added. 

Longitude can be obtained by means of a watch. The time- 
pieces which ships carry for this purpose are known as chronometers 
and they register the mean solar time of some specified meridian. 
When the shadow points directly north, that is when it is noon by 
the sun at a given position, let us suppose that the chronometer, 
which registers London time, shows that it is three o 'clock in the 
afternoon. As time travels westward, the ship is west of London. 
As local solar time is three hours slower than London time, the ship 
is 45° west of London. The longitude of London is 0° and therefore 
the longitude of the ship is 45° west. This result is approximately 
correct. To get the exact longitude the observer must know whether 
the sun is fast or slow and how much. 

Harbors. — Sea routes, like railroads, require good terminals. 
In the case of ocean routes these terminals are, of course, harbors. 
A rising coast is a regular one and' hence deficient in indentations 
and projections. The harbor at New York and the one at San Fran- 
cisco are examples of harbors created by a subsidence. 

In these days of large ships depth of water is a point of the utmost 
importance. The depth of water required by the largest ships is 
steadily increasing, hence many harbors have to be deepened or the 
seaports situated upon them lose some of their commerce. The 
average depth required by the largest ships in the world has practi- 
cally doubled since 1850 and is now about 40 feet. The rapid increase 
in the length of ships calls for larger harbor space. 

The value of a harbor is in many cases determined by the tidal 
range. Twice each day, in response to the combined attraction 
of the moon and sun, the waters of the ocean rise and fall. This 
attractive force, which is known as gravitation, is exerted by each 
heavenly body upon every other. The power of this attraction varies 
inversely as the square of the distance, and directly as the product 
of the masses. The distance between the earth and the sun is approx- 
imately 93,000,000 miles, but the moon is only 240,000 miles from 
the earth. Therefore, although the mass of the sun is about 26,500,000 
times that of the moon, the latter is the more important in the pro- 
duction of tides. In the open ocean the rise and fall of the tide is 
but one or two feet and there it has no relation to shipping. 



Ocean TransK)rtation 363 

The moon revolves about the earth from east to west in about 
29 days, and the tidal movements, when not hindered by the con- 
figuration of the continents, take the same course. As the tidal wave 
moves through the ocean there is little transference of water. It is 
the motion that is transmitted from point to point. This is illus- 
trated by the wave-like motion that runs across a field of wheat as 
the wind bends the stalks. When the tidal wave encounters shallow 
water near shore the motion is retarded on the sea floor but not at 
the surface of the water. Therefore the water piles up on the surface. 
When the tidal movement enters an estuary the converging shores 
contract the wave, which is, as a result, increased in height. When 
the tidal movement passes into a large bay or sea through a narrow 
opening, the wave spreads out upon entering the larger body and 
so decreases in height. 

In estuaries which face the direction from which the tidal wave 
is advancing the tidal range may be 10, 20, 30 or even 50 feet. 
On this account a ship may be able to enter or leave a harbor at high 
tide which could not do so if the range were slight. Liverpool, 
Bristol, Southampton, Antwerp, Rouen, Hamburg and Philadelphia 
are illustrations of harbors which owe their importance in part to 
tidal range. 

It is evident that it is of the greatest importance to the mariner 
to know just when high and low tide occur at given points and what 
the depth of water will be. Tide tables giving this information are 
published by many nations having seacoast. 

Owing to the way in which projections and islands interfere with 
the movement of the tidal wave, high tide may occur in one part 
of a bay or strait at the same time that low tide occurs in another. 
The resulting difference in the level of the water gives rise to rapid 
movements called races. The Strait of Messina, the Strait of Magel- 
lan and the north coast of Scotland are illustrations. 

Large sums of money are expended in sounding and charting the 
waters of the harbors and of the open ocean. Pilots depend upon 
these charts in navigating. Unless the charts are kept up to date 
they are valueless, as a large number of rocks and shoals are discov- 
ered annually. Scores of soundings may be made in a harbor and 
yet fail to reveal the presence of some rock which is a menace to ships. 

In 1902 the United States cruiser Brooklyn struck a rock in 
Buzzards Bay having only 18 feet of water over it, although the 
charts showed that it was surrounded by 30 ifeet of water. In the 
same year a rock was discovered in New York Harbor. Although 



364 Geography 

the depth all around the rock was 50 feet, the rock was covered by 
but 27 feet of water. In 1884 the steamer Pilgrim was injured by 
striking a rock in East River. Only 13 feet of water covered the rock. 

In recent years a wire drag submerged to a known depth is used to 
• draw through the water. This strikes every rock and shoal covered 
by less water than the given depth. By this process a rock was 
discovered in Blue Hill Bay on the coast of Maine having but seven 
feet of water over it and being but six feet in diameter at the top. 
The water surrounding the rock had a depth of 78 feet. 

The value of a harbor depends in part upon its connection with 
the back country. New York, for example, is at the seaward end 
of the easiest route from the Atlantic seaboard to the interior of the 
United States. As a result a large part of our conmierce passes through 
this city. San Francisco Bay leads directly into the interior of Cali- 
fornia and consequently more commerce centers upon its shores than 
in any other section of the state. 

Ocean transportation has developed wonderfully. The map facing 
page 368 shows the chief routes. At all times of the year ships are 
following these routes distributing the products of the different 
countries in all parts of the world and carrying large numbers of 
people. For a number of years past, approximately 1,000,000 immi- 
grants have landed upon our shores annually. This represents but a 
small part of the total number of passengers carried upon the ocean. 

STUDIES 

Describe the improvements which have been made in ocean navigation. 
To what extent are sailing vessels still used? How many carloads of freight 
can be carried on a great ocean liner ? What changes in harbors has been 
made necessary by the increased size of ships? Why is transportation by 
water so cheap? Why has Great Britain such an important merchant marine? 
Locate the greatest seaports of the world. Show the influence of the Panama 
and the Suez Canals upon ocean commerce. 

REFERENCES 
Jour, of Geog,, vol. vi, p. 131. (Ocean Freight Rates). 



CHAPTER XXXV 

Aerial Navigation 

The ease and grace with which birds move through the air has 
for centuries attracted the attention of men, and they have longed 
for the time when they too would be able to navigate the air. When 
the first experiments with balloons were made is not known, but the 
first which had any practical result was that of the brothers Stephen 
and Joseph Montgolfier in November, 1782. These young French- 
men caught the idea of employing heated air to lift bodies as they 
were observing smoke ascending in a fireplace. 

In the first experiments only paper bags were used. Later a 
larger balloon was made, and a duck, a chicken and a sheep sent up. 
The next year two. men made an ascent, and landed in safety. About 
a year later the English Channel was crossed in a balloon. 

The use of balloons rapidly increased from this time, and many 
long journeys were made. During the siege of Paris the people of 
the city kept in communication with the outside world by means 
of balloons. They were used quite extensively»during our Civil War. 

Thrdiigh balloon ascensions a great deal has been learned con- 
cerning the conditions of the atmosphere at considerable altitudes. 
During recent years self-recording instruments have been carried 
by small balloons to great altitudes. Some of these instruments 
have been picked up, and thus data accumulates. An Italian balloon 
carrying instruments reached the altitude of 23 miles. 

In 1862 Glaisher and Coxwell ascended in a balloon to a height 
of 7 miles, reporting a temperature of — 60° F. This is no doubt the 
greatest elevation ever reached by human beings. In 1897 Andree 
and two companions embarked in a balloon on a trip to the north 
pole. The fate of the voyagers is unknown. 

In October, 1900, a balloon traveled from Vincennes, France, to a 
point in Russia 1,193 miles distant. Ten years later a contest among 
balloonists took place in the United States. The balloons started 
from St. Louis and landed in many different places; one in New 
Jersey, and another near Quebec, 1,171 miles from the starting point. 

The difiiculty with the spherical balloon is that there are no means 
of guiding it. This can be accomplished only when it is driven at a 
speed greater than that at which it would be carried by the wind. 
The dirigible has now been in use for several years. Some of these 
balloons can carry a considerable number of passengers. 

365 



366 Geography 

Since 1898 airships or flying machines have been in use. In that 
year Santos Dumont, a Brazilian, succeeded in flying around the 
Eiffel Tower. Since that date a lai^e number of persons have used 
flying machines. Beginning with the year 1903 the Wright brothers 
made many flights. In 1909 a French airman, Blerfot by name, flew 
across the English Channel. In 1910 Hoxsey, at a contest held in 
California, rose to the altitude of 11,974 feet, but fell to his death. 
The next year a French aviator flew from London to Paris in 4 hours. 



Fio. 150.— United 8tat« Army Air Bervioe airplane. (Courlmy Fotd A. Cupenter.) 

Airships ^ured quite prominently in the European war which 
began in 1914. They were used to spy out positions, to cany dis- 
patches, and in bombarding. In 1919 the first airship crossed the 
Atlantic Ocean. Air mail service between New York and Wash- 
ington began in 1918, and mail is now being carried across the 
continent. To a limited extent pa.ssengers are being transported. 

STUDIES 
How are balloons made? Why is hydrogen gas used? Why are not aiishipa 
as practical as are automobiles as a. meaDs of transportation? How are airehjps 
likely to be of value? 

REFERENCES 
Bacon, Gertrude: "How Men Fly." 
David, Evan John: "Aircraft." 
Ferris, Richard, "How It Flies." 
Graham-White: "The Story of the Aeroplane." 
MiDDLBTON, Edgar C. : "Airfare of To- Day and of the Future." 
TuRNBB, CHAKLea C: "Aerial Navigation Today." 
Xahk, Albert F.: "Aerial Navigation," 



CHAPTER XXXVI 

Communication 

General Statement — The desire to communicate rapidly is 
almost as great as is the desire to ship commodities or to travel 
expeditiously. Modem methods of doing business would be impos- 
sible without the means of rapid communication. Goods are bought 
and sold, trains are operated, storm, frost and flood warnings are 
disseminated and lives saved at sea because of our system of rapid 
communication . 

' Primitive Means. — The first method of spreading news was by 
word of mouth. This meant that people on foot, or at a later time 
on horseback, carried the messages. When Cortez landed upon the 
coast of Mexico, in 1519, runners carried the news to Montezuma 
in his capital, where now is the City of Mexico. You remember that 
Paul Revere rode from town to town on horseback carrying the news 
of the landing of the British at Charlestown. In 1846 Kit Carson rode 
on horseback from California to Washington bearing dispatches. 

Signal fires and noises have been employed for a long time as a 
means of notifying people of danger or of calling them together for 
any purpose. Crude drums made by hollowing out logs have often 
been used, as the sound can be heard for a long distance. 

Mail Service. — For thousands of years letters have been written, 
but until recent times they were delivered by messengers traveling 
on foot or on horseback, or by carrier-pigeons. On January 1, 1676, 
the first regular mail service in America was established. This was 
for the purpose of handling the mail between New York and Boston. 
In the winter the round trip required one month. As late as 1704 
there was no post-office west of Philadelphia. On July 26, 1775, 
Benjamin Franklin was appointed Postmaster-General at a salary 
of $1,000.00 per year. 

Postage in Colonial times was high. For a long time there were 
no stamps, the amount due for delivery of the letter being stamped 
on the outside. James Chalmers, of Dundee, Scotland, made the 
first adhesive stamps in 1834. 

Until 1869 there was no railroad connecting the Atlantic and 
Pacific coasts of our country, and of course the sending of news across 
continent or around Cape Horn was a slow process. To remedy this 
condition the Pony Express was started on April 3, 1860. For a 

36'7 



368 Geography 

time the rate of postage was $5.00 per half ounce between Iowa and 
California. Later the cost was reduced to $1.00. The time required 
to make the trip was from 8 to 9 days. 

In 1790 there were in the United States but 70 post-offices. In 
1920 there were about 54,000. There were nearly 20,000 more than 
this in 1901, but the growth of the rural free delivery system reduced 
the number. 

The mail is now carried on the fastest trains and steamships. 
The cost of carrying a letter from the United States to Europe or 
Asia is but five cents, and the postage between the British Isles and 
the United States is but two cents. 

The Telegraph. — In 1840 Mr. Morse obtained a patent on his 
invention of the telegraph, and on March 4, 1843, Congress appro- 
priated the sum of $30,000 to help him establish a line between Balti- 
more and Washington. In 1846 the dispatching of trains by telegraph 
began. The lines of the Western Union Telegraph Company now 
reach every section of our country and many millions of messages 
are annually sent over them. Business activities of all kinds are 
closely related to telegraphy. Wireless telegraphy is one of the mar- 
vels of the age. Vessels equipped with wireless outfits can establish 
conmiunication between themselves and distant ships or the shore. 
Many lives are thus saved annually when ships collide with one 
another, with icebergs, or meet with accident from some other source. 

On October 10, 1907, the steamship Lusitania communicated with 
Newport, Rhode Island, although far out at sea. On January 28, 1917, 
the naval radio station at San Diego, California, talked with Arling- 
ton, Virginia; Panama; Nome, Alaska; Honolulu and Australia. This 
indicates the importance of this wonderful means of communication. 

The Telephone. — On February 14, 1876, two men, Alexander 
Graham Bell and Elisha Gray, made separate applications for 
patents on the telephone. On October 9, of the same year, Mr. Bell 
telephoned from Boston to Cambridge, a distance of two. miles, 
talking with Thomas A. Watson, the maker of the first instrument 
used in telephoning. On January 25, 1915, the same gentlemen 
again talked with one another over the telephone, but Mr. Bell was 
in New York City and Mr. Watson in San Francisco. Although 
separated by 3,400 miles of mountains, deserts and plains, they con- 
versed without difficulty, a wonderful proof of the triumph of science. 

The telephone plays an important part in the work of today, 
for by means of it an individual can keep in touch with his force of 
clerks and other helpers. Much important business is transacted by 
telephone, and a great deal of the family marketing is now done in this 



/' 



IgO'^ Longitude 150°We«t from 120" Greenwich 90 



T^ 






iG hi: ES Li. 



SEA 




CO 



ANT 



strait of Maijtllan ^^V ' 

C.HOHN 



k FALKLAND IS- 

nta Arcnai 



ARCTIC 



C E A N 



--/^-.-- :-. 



r 



180° LongUudc lao- West from 120" Greenwich 90^ 



£xl*tima 
Nttti Ro* 

Sub'Ma 



00' 



w 



o- 



ai 



J 



Communication 369 

manner. It is possible for those who are confined within doors to hear 
sermons, lectures and concerts over the wire. Business, professional 
and social appointments are quite generally made by telephone, and 
it has done very much to make country life more agreeable. 

The wireless telephone has recently been perfected to a wonderful 
degree. In October, 1914, messages sent from Arlington, Virginia, 
were received in Honolulu on the west and in Paris on the east. In 
both of the receiving stations the voice of the speaker was distinctly 
heard. More marvelous results may be expected along this line. 

The Submarine Cable. — Almost as soon as an event occurs in 
any part of the world it can be announced in most other parts. This 
has been made possible through the invention and the use of the 
submarine cable. In 1839 a wire was laid under the Hoogly River 
in India, and communication between the opposite banks was estab- 
lished by means of it. Three years later Mr. Morse laid a wire from 
Castle Garden to Governor's Island, New York. In 1849 a cable 
was operated between New York City and Jersey City. 

' Meanwhile the English were active along this line and established 
a cable between Calais and Dover, a distance of about 25 miles, in 
1847. The lajdng of the first Atlantic cable was commenced ten 
years later, and on August 13, 1858, the first message was transmitted, 
whichwas asfoUows: **Europe and America are united byt^legraph. 
Glory to God in the highest; on earth peace and good will to men." 
The cable worked but a short time and in 1865 the Great Eastern 
laid another. 

There are today many cables in operation. The longest of these 
is the Pacific cable from San Francisco to the Philippine Islands. 
This was laid in 15 months, although it is 8,000 miles long. There 
were in 1916 about 300,000 miles of ocean cable, most of which was 
owned by the English. 

STUDIES 

What was the length of Kit Carson's famous ride? Why does our government 
handle the mail service? Why is postage higher on first than on second class 
matter? Why is rapid communication so essential today? What is a "night 
letter"? Show how the telephone has improved rural conditions. What diffi- 
culties are encountered in laying ocean cables? Give some illustrations of the 
great value of wireless telegraphy and of ocean cables during the World War. 

REFERENCES 

Gibson, Charles R.: "Wireless Telegraphy." 
Gibson, Charles R.: "How Telegraphs and Telephones Work." 
"Telephone Voice Voyages by the National Geographic Society." Nat, Geog. 
Mag.f vol. xxxix, p. 296. 

24 



PART VII 

REGIONAL GEOGRAPHY OF THE UNITED STATES 

CHAPTER XXXVII 
The United States as a Whole 

General Statement. — ^Human response to geographic environ- 
ment is very marked in the United States. Being situated within 
the temperate zone, our climatic conditions are favorable to the 
development of a high civilization. In much of our area the succes- 
sion of weather changes acts as a tonic, stimulating people lx)th 
mentally and physically. Our extensive frontage on both the Atlan- 
tic and the Pacific Oceans is a great advantage commercially. In 
spite of rapid consumption and much waste our timber resource 
is great, and our mineral wealth is enormous. Vast stretches of 
comparatively level, fertile and well-watered land offer great encour- 
agement to agriculture, and much of the drier and more rugged area 
is well adapted to stock raising. Until comparatively recent years 
our country has offered, to all who desired it, free.or cheap land. This 
has been a powerful factor in the development of the United States, 
for it has drawn to our shores many millions of people from less 
favored parts of the world. 

Coast Line. — On the eastern, the western and a part of our 
southern boundary we are in contact with the sea. The northern 
part of both the Atlantic and the Pacific coast line is very irregular, 
due to subsidence and to glacial action. The southern part is more 
regular, due to elevation of the continental shelf. 

Owing to our favorable position non^ of the harbors are closed 
by ice during any part of the winter, as is the case with many of the 
ports of northern Europe. Our government spends much money in 
surveying and charting the coast, in improving harbors, and in pro- 
tecting human life and property by means of lights, buoys, bells, 
life-saving stations, and the Weather Bureau. 

Topography. — Ages ago the waves of the Atlantic Ocean rolled 
closer to the Appalachian Mountains than they do today. An eleva- 
tion of the continental shelf produced a plain extending from New 
Jersey to Mexico. To that part of the area lying north of the Gulf 
pf Mexico has been given the name Atlantic Coastal Plain. 

371 



372 Geography 

It was indeed fortunate that the first settlers along the Atlantic 
Coast found a fertile plain instead of a repelling mountain system. 
The struggle to establish and support themselves was on this ac- 
count less difficult than it would otherwise have been. Numerous 
harbors and tidal streams giave easy access to the region. The Appa- 
lachian Mountains, the dense forests, and the savage Indians practi- 
cally confined settlement to the plain for 150 years.' This concentra- 
tion of population gave a solidarity to the colonists which they would 
not otherwise have possessed. 

The Gulf Plain is in reality a continuation of the Atlantic Coastal 
Plain. It extends from Florida to Mexico. There are few good 
natural harbors. The climate is warm and moist, and the soil for 
the most part fertile, hence cotton, sugar, rice and fruits are pro- 
duced in abundance. 

West of the Atlantic Coastal Plain is the Piedmont or foothill 
region which gradually merges with the Appalachian Barrier. The 
latter consists of moimtains, plateaus and valleys, moderate in ele- 
vation, ancient and greatly eroded. The mountains gradually 
increase in altitude from north to souths culminating in North 
Carolina. These mountains are of great economic importance 
because of their forest and mineral wealth, and because of the power 
which their streams furnish. 

The Central Plafai is chiefly drained by the Mississippi and its 
tributaries. A large part of the area is lees than 1,000 feet above 
sea level. The general level is broken in but few places, the Ozark 
uplift and the Black Hills being the most lofty elevations. The 
glacier spread a mantle of drift over most of the northern part, 
and this, as well as the levelness of the land, has favored agri- 
culture. The slight relief has made the construction of roads 
comparatively easy. 

West of the one hundredth meridian the Central Plain is semi- 
arid, and, in consequence, is sparsely settled. This region, which 
is known as the High Plains, terminates at the eastern foothills of 
the Rocky Mountains. Irrigation, both by artesian and surface 
waters, has reclaimed large areas formerly valuable only for pas- 
turage. Denver, which belongs to the Rocky Mountain States, but 
which is in reality situated in the High Plains province, is the only 
large city in the area. 

The Rocky Mountain section consists of many systems, ranges, 
plateaus and valleys. The great altitude, as well as the great width 
of these mountains, has caused them to be a very decided obstacle 




PHYSICAL MAP OF ' 



73 69 




\ mi It \ * V 


^ 




HE TTNITED STATES 



The United States as a Whole 373 

to the building of roads and to the movement of population and com- 
modities. Increase in population made roads a necessity, and in 
1869 the first railroad crossed these mountains. Stock raising and 
mining are the leading industries. In certain sections the scenery 
attracts large nmnbers of people every summer. 

Enclosed by the Rocky Mountains on the east and the Sierra 
Nevada and Cascade Mountains on the west, is an extensive plateau 
consisting of three chief divisions. The most northerly division is 
called the Columbia Plateau. Over much of this area vast floods of 
lava have been poured. The Snake River has carved its canyon in 
this lava to a depth of nearly a mile in one place. 

The middle section of the plateau is called the Great Basin. 
This area has numerous mountain ranges trending in a general 
north-south direction. They are block mountains which in most 
cases show by their form, by hot springs and by frequent earthquake^ 
shocks the evidences of youth. Precipitation is deficient in the 
Great Basin, and except where irrigation is practiced population 
is very sparse. The drainage does not reach the sea, hence is said 
to be continental. 

The Colorado Plateau is the most southerly of the three divisions. 
Parts of it reach the altitude of 8,000 feet above the sea, and some 
of the mountains rise several thousand feet higher. The valleys are 
of the canyon type, offering little encouragement to settlement and 
being an obstacle to transportation and travel. 

The eastern boundary of the Pacific Slope is formed by the crest 
line of the Sierra Nevada and the Cascade Mountains. These 
mountains are young geologically, and many of the peaks of the 
latter are volcanic. The most lofty parts of the mountains rise above 
the snow line, and owing to their altitude most of the passes are 
unfavorable to the construction of railroads. 

Between the Sierra Nevada and the Cascade on the east and the 
Coast Ranges on the west is the great valley of California, and the 
much smaller but very fertile valley of the Willamette. 

The Coast Ranges are nowhere very lofty, but they are quite 
rugged and greatly restrict settlement. In the north they are well 
watered and covered by forests, but in the south, where precipita- 
tion is light, forest growth is much less luxuriant. 

Hydrography. — The waterways and their valleys have played 
an important part in the development of the United States. The 
Altantic Slope has many streams the lower courses of which are 
navigable by vessels drawing but a few feet of water. The Hudson 



374 Geography 

■ ■ • • 

is of great commercial importance. The Ohio is navigable to Pitts- 
burgh by vessels of light draft and the deepening of the channel 
is contemplated. The Mississippi offers a great mileage of navigable 
waters, and it also will be deepened. The surface features of the 
country are such that it has been feasible to dig canals in many 
places. Although a number of canals have been abandoned, some 
2,000 miles of canals are now in operation. The Great Lakes are 
of tremendous value in the transportation of commodities. Few 
streams in the western part of our country are of value from the 
standpoint of navigation. This is in part due to lack of depth 
' and in part to gradient. The Columbia is the most navigable of our 
western rivers. 

The rivers of the United States furnish much power, only a part 
of which has as yet been developed. This is especially true of the 
western part of the country. The recently constructed dam at 
Keokuk, Iowa, is an illustration of what may be done. Here 
some 300,000 horse-power is developed. The Pacific Slope has a 
tremendous amount of water power owing to the distance which 
the streams fall. California alone is estimated to have 6,000,000 
horse-power. This is especially important as the state has practi- 
cally no coal. 

Climate. — ^The United States extends from the twenty-fifth to 
the forty-ninth parallels of north latitude. As a result there is much 
variation between the climatic conditions in the southern and in the 
northern parts of the country, with a corresponding variation in 
products. Because of the vast area of the country the climate in 
the interior is continental. Owing to the influence of the ocean, the 
clin^ate of the west coast is very equable. 

The relief being great, the altitude varying from 265 feet below 
sea level to 15,000 feet above, altitude playB an important part in 
determining climate in the United States. 

All of the United States east of the one hundredth meridian 
receives sufficient precipitation to support agriculture. Locally 
west of this meridian, especially along the northwest coast, the 
precipitation is heavy, but there are extensive areas where arid 
conditions prevail. 

In the northern part of the country the winters are long and severe 
and blizzards occasionally obstruct transportation. In the southern 
part snow and frost seldom occur. The central part of the Mississippi 
valley, especially during the summer months, is visited at intervals 
by destructive tornadoes. On the Pacific Slope there are but two 



-"IB''*W?5pf 




fGt'BMuai of HfUt (hat iwiil Ik ilc7 r<u< lU' lun fnm MOs i 



"*--/— ■ 



The United States as a Whole 375 

seasons, the wet or winter season, and the dry or summer season. 
Elsewhere there are four rather clearly defined seasons. 

Forests. — Originally our country had a much more extensive 
forest area than it now has. About 18 per cent, of our total area is 
classed as forest, a part of which is owned by the government. Fig. 
115 shows the four chief areas in the United States. Timber is one 
of the most valuable resources which a country can have because of 
the many important uses to which forest products are put. Lumber 
was one of our first exports, and is today an export. Much thought 
is now being given to forest conservation, and trees are being planted 
by individuals as well as by the government. 

Mineral Wealth. — Our country is exceedingly rich in minerals, 
being the greatest producer of mineral wealtlf in the world. The total 
value of our output of minerals is about $2,500,000,000 annually. 
We have tremendous quantities of coal, iron, petroleum, copper, 
lead, zinc, gold, silver, mercury, salt, natural gas, building stones, 
clay and mineral waters. 

Investigation has shown that we have a larger reserve of the 
minerals which are essential to great industrial development than 
has any other nation. These conditions give us a great advantage 
from the standpoint of manufacturing. It is highly probable that 
the nations of western Europe will in the future look to this country 
for a large part of their supplies of coal. 

Soil. — A fertile soil is an asset of priceless value. Although 
there arc in the aggregate considerable areas of land within our 
borders that are non-productive because of alkali, most of our 
arid lands need but the application of water to render them 
highly productive. 

In the arid and semi-arid West the soil is deficient in huma* , but 
owing to light rainfall the soluble elements of the soil have not been 
leached out as they have been in more humid regions. In most of 
the Mississippi basin north of the fortieth parallel glaciers have been 
of great benefit in preparing the soil for agriculture. 

A soil survey is being carried on by the government, the results 
of which enable the prospective settler to determine whether or 
not he desii'es to locate in a given region. By taking advantage 
of the facts which the survey presents, farmers know what crops 
are best adapted to their soils and the special treatment which 
each soil requires. 

About 40 per cent, of the total area of the United States is classed 
as productive, but only about J 5 per cent, is under cultivation. For the 



376 Geography 

five-year period ending with 1915 the average annual value of all 
crops grown in our country was about $6,000,000,000. In 1917 the 
value was $13,600,000,000. These figures are too large to be compre- 
hended, but they serve to show the economic importance of the soil. 
Through the reclamation of both swamp and arid lands, the area 
devoted to agriculture is yearly increased. 

Manufacturing and Commerce. — Although our country is so 
young, manufacturing has assumed much importance. This is 
because of our favorable climate, fertile soil, immense output of raw- 
materials from the farm, forest and niine, our widely distributed 
water power and the general intelligence of our people. Where 
natural conditions are the most favorable, manufacturing has made 
the greatest progress. Industry is highly developed in the north- 
eastern part of our country. The states bordering upon the Great 
I^akes have the advantaige of cheap transportation. 

From the standpoint of the value of the products the leading 
manufactures rank as follows: Meat, foundry and machine shop 
articles, lumber, the output of steel and rolling mills, flour, books 
and other printed matter, cotton goods, clothing, boots and shoes, 
woolen goods. 

In the value of products the five leading states were, in 1914, 
New York, Pennsylvania, Illinois, Ohio and Massachusetts. The 
order has been practically the same for many years. Cheap fuel, 
cheap transportation for raw and finished products, large population 
and ready markets are the factors which explain this. Of the total 
power used in the United States for manufacturing in 1914 about 10 
per cent, was produced by falling water. According to Leighton, the 
available water power in the United States is suflScient to do all of 
our manufacturing. "There is more than enough water power in the 
United States to fulfill every want that may reasonably be expected 
to arise in many generations."* 

Our domestic commerce is more important than our foreign 
commerce. Our exports are chiefly raw products which go to 
more densely populated countries. We import, in large quan- 
tities, sugar, coffee, tea, cocoa, raw silk, rubber, tropical fruits, 
hides, skins and dyes. 

Roads. — The mileage of both wagon and railroads is rapidly 
increasing in the United States. This and improvements in the roads 

* Leighton: *' Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social 
Science," vol. xxxiii, p. 546. 



The United States as a Whole 377 

and rolling stock are of great importance in carrying on our domestic 
commerce. In 1917 the total mileage of wagon roads in the United 
States was about 2,400,000, and in the same year there was expended 
on these roads about $200,000,000. 

The improvement of roads has been of great benefit to rural life. 
Commodities can be more cheaply marketed. It means more acces- 
sible and better schools, and easier means of communication for 
all purposes. 

In 1917 there were in our country more than 260,000 miles of 
railway, or about 8 miles to each 100 square miles of territory, and 
about 26 miles to each 10,000 inhabitants. 

Population. — The population of the United States has increased 
enormously since the first census was taken in 1790. The rapid 
increase in population, as well as its cosmopolitan character^ are due 
to the relatively cheap land, the vast natural resources, the field for 
all kinds of labor at good wages, the freedom from military service, 
and other forms of civil liberty. 

TABLE 45. 
Growth of Population in the United States.* 

Census Year ^ Population of Gain Popuktion per 

v>c BIAS c»i Continental U. S. Per cent. square mile 

1790.... 3,929,214 ... 4.6 

1800 5,308,483 35.1 6.1 

1810 7,239,881 36.4 4.3 

1820 9,638,453 ^ 33.1 5.5 

1830. . 12,866,020 ' 33.5 7.3 

1840 17,069,453 32.7 9.7 

1850 23,191,876 36.9 7.9 

1860 31,443,321 36,6 10.6 

1870 38,558,371 22.6 13.0 

1880 50,155,783 30.1 16.9 

1890 62,947,714 25.5 21.2 

t900 75,994,575 20.7 25.6 

1910 91,972,266 21.0 30.9 

1920 (Preliminary) . . 105,683,108 14.9 34.8 

The United States has by no means reached the limit of its power 
to support a population and its density of population is far below that 
of many other countries, as is shown by Table 46. 

"Census Report, 1910, vol. i, pp. 24 and 41. 



378 Geography 

TABLE 46. 
Abea and Population of Certain Countries.' 

Area in Penons 

Country square miles Population square mile 

United States 3,026,789 105,683,108 (1920) 34.8 

United Kingdom 121,316 46,089,000 (1916) 379.5 

Holland 12,648 6,583,000 (1915) 498.7 

Belgium 11,373 7,658,000 (1913) 673. 

France 207,054. 39,700,000(1916) 191.6 

Germany ....:.. 208,780 67,810,000 (1913) 324.7 

Italy 110,550 36,546,000(1916) 330.2 

Russian Empire. 8,647,657 178,905,000 (1915) 21.5 

Our density of population is of course much higher in the eastern 
and central parts of our country than it is in the western part. In 
1920 Rhode Island ranked first, having 566.4 persons per square mile. 
Nevada was at the foot of the list, having a density of but .7 person 
per square mile, Not a state west of the Mississippi River had a 
density as high as 50 per square mile, and but 10 states in the Union 
had densities of 100 or more. 

Our Census Reports show that in 1910 there were in the United 
States 32,243,442 persons classed as ''foreign white stock." This 
includes people who were bom in foreign countries, and children 
whose parents were not bom in this country. The chief sources of 
our foreign-bom population, according to the census of 1910, are 
shown below. 

TABLE 47. 

Sources or Our FoREiGNrBoRN Population in 1910.* 

Country Number of persons 

Germany 8,282,618 

Ireland 4,504,460 

Canada 2,754,615 

Russia 2,541,649 

England 2,322,442 

Italy 2,098,360 

Austria 2,001,559 

Sweden 1,364,215 

. Norway 979,099 

Hungary. 700,227 

Scotland 659,663 

Denmark 400,064 

Mexico 382,002 

Switzerland 301,650 

'Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1912, pp. 800, 801, 
* Census Reports^ 1910, vol. i, p. 87$, 



POLITICAL MAP O 



S UNITED STATES 



The United States as a Whole 379 

During recent years there has been a great increase in the number 
of immigrants from the southern part of Europe, Italy and Russia par- 
ticularly. The Italians and the Russians usually locate in the cities. 
The Scandinavians, in large numbers, settle in the northwestern 
part of the United States and engage in lumbering and wheat growing. 

It is true that our country has furnished homes to millions of 
people who were not content with conditions in their home lands. 
It is equally tnie that our country owes very much to these people, 



ty of populfltia 


n in the United States. 1910 U 


applied' to^Ai 


lona, California, Washington, 



They have helped to clear the land and establish farms, build roads, 
operate mines, develop cities, maintain schools and churches, and 
govern the nation. In other words, the development of the resources 
of the United States and the growth of its human institutions are 
entirely due to the work of men and women who at the most are b\jt a 
few generations removed from an ancestry whose home was in Europe. 

STUDIES 
Why are there so many more lighthouses and life-aaving atationa on our 
eastern than our western coast? Where do valleya and passea exert the greatest 
influence upon our transcontinental railroads? Upon a base map of the United 
States, indicate the head of navigation of each important river. Which of the 
states have no navigable rivers? Compare the average date of the first killing 



380 Geography 

frost in St. Louis with the dat^ of the same event in St. Paul. Account for the 
difference. Coiapare the value of the minerals produced yearly in the United 
States with the average annual value of our crops. What restrictions does our 
government place upon inmiigration? Make a study of one or more ways in 
which our government has encouraged industry. 

REFERENCES 

Adams, Cyrus C: *'The United States — Land and Waters." Nai. Geog. Mag,^ 

vol. xiv, p. 171. 
Fbnnbman, N. M.: "Physiographic Boundaries Within the United States." 

Annals Association of Am. Geographers^ vol. iv, p. 84. 
Gregory, Keller and Bishop: "Physical and Commercial Geography," pp. 252- 

350. 
Jefferson, Mare: "Some Considerations on the Geographical Provinces of 

the United States." Annals of the Association of Am. Geographers ^ vol. 

vii, p. 3. 
JoERG, Wolfgang L. G.: "The Subdivision of North America into Natural 

Regions." Annals Association of Am. Geographers j vol iv, p. 55. 
Raphael, Zon: "When Our Country is Fifty Years Older." Nai. Geog. Mag.f 

vol. XX, p. 573. 
Russell, I. C: "North America." 
U. S. Census Reports. 
Yearbooks, U. ^. Dept. of Agriculture. 



CHAPTER XXXVIII 

The New England Province 

General Statement. — The total area of the New England states 
is equal to only about two-thirds that of the state of Colorado, yet 
in 1920 the population of the former was 7,400,856, while that of the 
latter was but 939,376. In the same year New England had ten 
cities in each of which the population was more than 100,000, although 
Colorado had but one city belonging to this class. New England 
is essentially industrial. In 1910 her urban population was 83 per 
cent, of her total population. In the same year 50 per cent, of the 
total population of Colorado was classed as urban. 

Topography. — New England is largely a highland region, nearly 
all of which slopes to the Atlantic Ocean. Although the mountains 
are not lofty, there is considerable relief. Mt. Washington, altitude 
6,293 feet, is the highest point in the northern Appalachian Mountains, 
and Mt. Katahdin, altitude 5,273 feet, is the most lofty peak in Maine. 
The Green Mountains and the Berkshire Hills on the west and the 
White Mountains on the east send water to the Connecticut Basin, 
the largest of the New England basins. 

Geologically New England is one of the oldest parts of North 
America. It was once a region of lofty mountains, but many cen- 
turies of erosion reduced them nearly to sea level. The rocks are 
largely crystalline, schists and gneisses being widely distributed. 
This means that these rocks were originally at great depths, for only 
under great pressure are such rocks formed. The monadnocks which 
here and there rise above a remarkable even skyline are the rem- 
nants of the more resistant peaks. 

When this region had reached the stage of maturity or old age 
it was broadly uplifted. Only on this theory can the youthful valleys 
be accounted for. The elevation rejuvenated the streams, which, 
as a result, have so dissected the old lands as to form the relatively, 
deep and steep-sided valleys which are characteristic of youth. 

The ice invasion, which occurred later than the elevation, was 
a powerful factor in shaping the topography. The ice covered prac- 
tically the entire area. Countless hills which diversify the landscape 
are of glacial origin and most of the lakes and falls are the result of 
ice action. 

381 



y 



382 Geography 

Comparatively recently a depression took place. This admitted 
the sea to the lower parts of the land, drowning the seaward portions 
of the river basins and converting many hills and ridges into islands 
and penmsulas. 

Where the rocks are not very resistant, lowlands have developed. 
Weak sandstones and shales are found in the lower Connecticut 
valley nearly to the northern border of Massachusetts. Here erosion 
has developed a broad valley, while on the more resistant rocks 
farther north the valley is narrower and more rugged. Weak rocks 
also exist in the lowland area tributary to Narragansett Bay and in 
the Boston Basin which is adjacent to Boston Bay. 

The most rugged portions of New England are the most sparsely 
populated. The Boston Basin contained in 1920 about one-half of 
the population of New England. In the same year the density of 
population in Rhode Island was 566 per square mile, and in Vermont 
but 37 per square mile. The surface features have discouraged agri- 
culture on a large scale. ' 

Transportation, both by rivers and by roads, is definitely related 
to the topography. In general the rivers are not navigable, but the 
valleys have guided land routes. The valley of the Connecticut 
is an important route of travel, and the tributary valleys of the Deer- 
field and Westfield lead to the Berkshire Barrier and to New York 
State. To secure cheaper transportation between New England and 
the West, and especially to benefit Boston, the Hoosac Tunnel, 
nearly five miles in length, was constructed through the Berkshire 
Hills.. The tunnel has an elevation of 2,300 feet and is used by the 
Ktchburg Railroad, which enters the valley of Deerfield River at 
Greenfield. This route leads to the Mohawk depression and to the 
interior of our country. The Boston and Albany Railroad enters 
the valley of the Westfield River at Springfield, Massachusetts. 
The road follows the valley for some distance and crosses the Berk- 
shire Hills, reaching the Hudson valley at Albany. 

Influence of the Glaciers. — That glaciers once covered all of New 
England is shown by the drift and by the polished and striated rock. 
Lake basins were enlarged and others scooped out of solid rocks. 
Streams were blocked by the drift, thus giving rise to numerous lakes 
and falls. The water power thus created led to the establishment of 
many towns and to the development of manufacturing. 

The ice swept much of the soil from the steeper slopes. Some of 
this was carried to the sea and some left upon the lower lands. 
Boulders in countless numbers were scattered over the surface of the 



The New England Province 383 

country, greatly to the disadvantage of agriculture. It has been 
estimated that upon the average it requires the labor of one 
man for one month to entirely remove the boulders from an acre 
of land. The action of the glaciers reduced the angular features of 
the topography and produced a subdued effect. Whittier's ex- 
pression, "The hiUa roll wave-like inland," has much of truth in it. 

Hydrography. — Owing to the 
relief of the land and the influence 
of the ice, the rivers are of little 
value for navigation, but are of 
great value from the standpoint 
of power. The Penobscot, which 
"i£ about 200 miles in length, rises 
at an altitude of about 2,000 feet. 
It is navigable to Bangor, 60 miles 
from the sea. The Kennebec, 
which has its source in Moosehead 
Lake at an altitude of l,026feet,i8 
about 150 miles in length. Au- 
gusta, 44 miles from the sea, is at 
the head of navigation, there being 
lOfeetof wateratthispoint. The 
average fall of the river from the 
lake to tidewater is 8.5 feet per 
mile. The upper part of the bs^in 
is well forested, thus helping to 
regulate the flow of the water. 
There are many falls in the river 

and power has been developed at ^"'- ''^-"'**''^^^t^iT" '" '^* ™'* 
several points. At Augusta a dam 

gives a head of 17 feet of water. Here are cotton mills and a light 
plant. The Kennebec River is one of the best power streams in the 
United States and is open 8 months in the year. Between Augusta 
and Richmond much ice is cut on the Kennebec River, and is shipped 
to cities in the South. 

The Androscoggin is navigable to Lewiston, about 30 miles inland, 
where considerable power is developed. At Rumford Falls the river 
drops 177 feet in one mile, and its power is used in the manufacture 
of pulp and paper. 

Saco and Biddeford, but 5 miles from the coast, are at the head 
of navigation on the Saco River, Here there are cotton mills. Haver- 



384 Geography 

hill, at the head of navigation on the Merrimac, is 17 miles from the 
sea. The river is famous for the power which it furnishes. Haverhill, 
Lawrence, Lowell, Nashua and Manchester owe their early impor- 
tance as cotton and woolen manufacturing centers to water power. 

The Connecticut is the largest of the New England Rivers. 
Jn its course of 345 miles from the Connecticut Lakes it falls 1,900 
feet. The upper part of the basin is rugged and narrow, largely 
because. of the resistant rocks. In its lower part the valley is wider, 
due in part to the softer rocks, and here agriculture is important. 
Boats ascend the river to Hartford, a distance of 50 miles. At Holyoke 
a dam was constructed in 1849. Here the river falls 60 feet in 
one and one-half miles, and much power is used in the manufac- 
ture of paper. Power is developed also at Wilders, Bellows Falls and 
TumeKs Falls. 

TheUarge area covered by forests, as well as the numerous lakes 
and ponds, is an important factor in regulating the flow of water in 
the streams, thus increasing their value as power producers. Maine 
has more than 1,500 lakes, most of which are of course quite small. 
The largest lake entirely within New England is Moosehead Lake. 
This has long been used as a reservoir in which to store water for log 
driving and for the development of power. 

Although much water power is still used directly, electrical 
energy developed from falling water is much more important today. 
In 1870 streams furnished 70 per cent, of the power used in New 
England for manufacturing. In 1900 the percentage had fallen to 
35, and in 1910 to 27. 

Climate.-rNew England is about 500 miles south of the southern 
shore of Great Britain, yet its climate is colder in winter and warmer 
in summer than that of London. The January isotherm of 50° F. 
touches the southern coast of England, but the mean average tem- 
perature of Boston during the month of January is 27° F. / The July 
isotherm of 63° F. passes close to London, while that of 72° F. is 
drawn through Boston. 

In other words, New England has a variable or continental climate 
due to the fact that the prevailing winds blow across the continent 
before they reach this area. These winds carry to New England the 
high summer and the low winter temperatures of the land to the 
westward. In New England, especially upon the highlands, snow 
remains upon the ground for several months each year, and the 
growing season is much shorter than it is in corresponding latitudes 
upon the Pacific Coast of the United States. In the lower part of 



72" 




NEW ENGLAND 
STATES 

SCALE OP MILES 



r 





"I r 

80 40 



"T" 
<0 



80 100 



72° Lon^tude 



West 70° from 



Greenwich 68 



MAP OF NEW ENGLAND 



The New Enqlaito Provincb 385 

tiie Connecticut valley Bpiing conies about one month earlier than 
it does in the northern part. 

The precipitation in New England ia everywhere abundant and 
evaporation ia not rapid. In most of the area the annual precipita- 
tion varies from 40 to 50 inches and is quite uniformly distributed 
throughout the four seasons. 

Forests. — Originally nearly all of New England was forested, 
white pine, spruce and hemlock predominating. There was a market 
for lumber in Europe and the timber was rapidly cut. So rapidly 



was the land cleared that by 1870 New England had lost her suprem- 
acy as a lumber producer. Naturally the forest areas nearest the 
coast were the ones first cleared of thnber. Maine has much timber 
left, and lumber is second in value among her products. 

The portion of the St. John Basin which is in Maine is well forested. 
The same is true of the St. Croix and the northern parte of the basins 
of the Penobscot, Kennebec and Androscoggin. In the northern 
part of the Kennebec Basin the population ia chiefly lumbermen. 
Much timber yet remains in the Connecticut basin. Associated with 
lumbering are the industries of barrel and box making, the manufac- 
ture of paper pulp and paper, of furniture, vehicles, spools, toys and 
other articles. 

Influence of the Ocean. — The ocean has exerted a definite influ- 
ence in shaping the geography of New England. The subsidence 
25 



386 GlSOGRAPHT 

produced an exteimive coast line which reduces the cost of transport- 
ing commodities to and from the interior. Maine has some 2,000 miles 
of fiorded coast line. Along the irregular well-settled coast of New 
England much protection is needed. Hence the government spends 
laige sums of money in maintaining lights, buoys, bells and life- 
saving stations. 

Cape Cod has long been an obstacle to coastwise conmierce 
because it has increased the distance between northern and southern 
ports, and because of the lai^e annual loss of property and life off its 
coast. More than 200 years ago it was recognized that the cutting of a 
canal across the base^of the cape would be a great saving to shipping. 
Not until July 29, 1914, did, thp canal become a reality, however. 
: r The Gape Cod Canal, which cost $12,000,000, is the result of pri- 
vate enterprise. It is about 8 miles long, and connects Cape Cod 
on the north with Buzzards Bay on the south. A depression in a 
moraine, which is followed by the Boston-Providence Railroad, 
afforded an easy route. 

An immense tonnage passes through the canal. Coal J(yr New 
England and lumber jrom New England are the most important 
'Commodities. The canal reduces the distance between northern and 
southern ports by 60 to 70. miles, and consequently lessens the cost 
of shipment. As the danger from storms is decreased, trds results in 
a direct saving, and it also lowers the insurance rates, Thi»ughout 
its entire teugth the canal is illuminated just as is a cit^. street. 
^ The excellent fishing off shore, as well as the numerous ^bays 
affording anchorage, led to the development of fishing. Although 
Boston and Providence are noted centers of the fishing industry, 
Gloucester, which is protected by the granite of Cape Ann, is the 
most important in all New England. 

Much fishing is done close to shore, but many crews go to the 
Grand Banks. On these longer trips the fishermen are gone for weeks 
at a time. The prevalence of fogs on the Grand Banks makes the 
fishing industry rather hazardous there. Contact with the sea 
developed seamanship, and in early days our merchant marine was 
largely recruited from these shores. 

Wave erosion has developed many interesting shore features. 
In speaking of this work Emerson makes the ocean say: **I drive 
my wedges home, and carve the coastwise mountains into caves." 
Owing to the large urban population, the numerous bays, the pic- 
turesque scenery and the cool suiiamCT climate, there are many 
resorts along the Maine coast. 



The New England Province 387 

Agriculture.^^urface, soil and climate are unfavorable to agri- 
culture in New England, but dairying ia an important industry. 
The slopes aifoixl- n^ch good pasturage and there is a large area 
devoted to the production of hay and forage.. There are masiy 
cities in New England, therefore, where the dairying industry is a 
response to human as well as physical conditions. Many people are 
engaged in truck farming because of the local demand for vegetables. 



Fio. IM.— Preparing diy fish in New Eoglanil 

Potatoes are grown extensively in Aroostook County, Maine. 
In 1918 this limited area produced about 4 per cent, of the total 
potato crop of the United States. Sumatra tobacco ia grown in the 
Connecticut valley and cranberries on Cape Cod. 

Mineral Wealth. — There is little mineral wealth in New England 
^de from building stones, of which there is an abundant supply. 
Vermont ranks first among the states of the Union in point of total 
value of granite produced. Large quantities of granite are quarried 
iQ Massachusetts, Maine and New Hampshire. Measured in terms 
of value, New England produces nearly one-half of the granite quar- 
ried in the United States. Vermont produces more marble than does 
any other state in the Union. There are extensive quarries near 
Proctor and Montpelier. Considerable sandstone and slate also are 
quarried in New England. In Massachusetts clay deposits are worked. 



888 Geography 

Industries. — It was but natural, since topography, soil and 
climate and a dense forest cover were all unfavorable to agriculture, 
and since there was an abundance of water power, excellent harbors 
and an oversea market, that the people of New England should 
have turned to industry and commerce. 

The industry of lumbering has already been suflSiciently empha- 
sized. Fishing developed at an early day and is yet very important. 
New England is reasonably close to food fishing grounds; she has 
good harbors; she has the material from which to construct the 
vessels, and there has always been a good market both at home and 
abroad. Another decided advantage is found in the fact that a 
large part of the population is situated near the seacoast. ''Colonial 
records show that during the century beginning with 1650 the pros- 
perity of the northern settlements was closely connected with deep- 
sea fishing."^ 

Gloucester and Boston are today the great fishing centers. 
Gloucester owed its early importance to the fact that it had the best 
port on Cape Ann and that it was the first of the ports to secure 
railroad connection with Boston. 

Of raw material for export New England produces little but 
lumber, but the cotton and the sugar of the South, the wool and 
leather of the West, the iron of Pennsylvania, the rubber of the 
Amazon basin and the silk of Italy and France can, owing to water 
power, nearness to coal, an abundance of capital, skilled labor and 
good markets, be converted in New England's mills into manufac- 
tured articles at a profit. 

New England manufactures everything from pins to locomotives. 
More than one-half of the cotton, woolen, leather and rubber goods 
made in the United States are manufactured in New England. 
Cotton goods are turned out in large quantities at Fall River, Lowell, 
New Bedford and Manchester, and woolen goods at Lawrence, Paw- 
tucket, Woonsocket and Providence. Haverhill, Lynn and Brock- 
ton are noted shoe towns. Firearms are made at Springfield, Massa- 
chusetts. Waltham manufactures watches, and Holyoke paper. 
At Providence there are locomotive works. Worcester manufactures 
wire,and Willimantic thread. Dorchester is the home of Baker's choco- 
late, and at Quincy Point shipbuilding is carried on. This is suggestive 
of the importance of manufacturing in the New England states. 

The developpient of manufacturing has led to a relatively dense 
population and to the growth of cities. For many years, however , 

* Moore, J. R. H. : "industrial History of the American People," pp. 21, 22. 



The New England Province 389 

the increase in population has not been so rapid as that of some 
other areas. In 1790 the population of New England was 1,009,408. 
One hundred years later it was 4,700,749, and in 1910 it was 6,552,681. 
The increase during the decade between 1900 and 1910 was 17 per 
cent. During the same period the population of the United States 
increased 21 per cent., and that of the Pacific Coast States 73 per cent. 

TABLE 47. 
Density of Population in the New England States in 1910. 

Area Density 

Maine 24 

New Hampshire 47 

Vennont 37 

Massachusetts 466 

Rhode Island 566 

Connecticut 276 

United States 34 

This shows that the three states in which manufacturing is most 
important, and which have the largest area of relatively level land, 
have the most dense population. The large forest area in Maine 
and the lack of coast line in the case of Vermont are factors that 
reduce the population. 

There is an interesting relationship between manufacturing and 
the number of foreign-born persons in the several states. In 1910 
the percentage of the foreign born was, in Maine, 15; in New Hamp- 
shire, 22; in Vermont, 14; in Massachusetts, 31; in Rhode Island, 33; 
and in Connecticut, 29. 

In some sections of rural New Engltod the population has de- 
creased. This is in part because the West and Middle West have 
offeree! much greater opportunities to the farmer, and in part because 
of the attractions which city life has for most people. 

In 1920 there were in the United States 68 cities each of which has 
a population of 100,000 or more. Ten of these cities are located 
in New England and seven of them are in Massachusetts. 

Boston, the metropolis of New England, was settled in 1630 and 
received its name from a town in Lincolnshire, England. Boston 
Peninsula is connected with the mainland by a narrow isthmus. 
In early days this was flooded at high tide when a strong wind blew 
from the sea. This effect of the tide was an advantage from the stand- 
point of defense, and Was a factor leading to the location of Boston. 
A supply of good drinking water was another. Several natural 



390 GBOaRAPHT 

conditions have contributed to the growth of the city. It has a large 
and well protected harbor with deep water. The harbor is open all 
of the year, and tributary to it is the lai^est lowland in the state, 
Bosten Basin. Boston has become a great distributing colter and 
is therefore an important railroad and steamship terminus. 

Boston is a little nearer to Liverpool than is New York. It is 
also the eastern terminus of the most direct route between Chicago 



and the Atlantic seaboard. The Berkshire Barrier prevented Boston 
from successfully competing with New York City in the matter of 
transportation between the coast and the interior. The opening 
of the Hoosac Tunnel did much to equalize conditions, but Boston 
cannot hope to rival New York City as a seaport and a center 
of population. The Boston and Maine Railroad connects Boston 
with Montreal. 

Boston is today our second seaport in importance. It is a receiv- 
ing and distributing center for a dbtrict in which there are many 
cities and towns which are important industrially. Boston is a 
noted money center, a great wool market, a sugar refinir^ city, an 
important market for hides, and a fishing and a publishing center. 



The New England Province 391 

Considerable of our early history was enacted in Boston or in 
the immediate vicinity, and this is one of the reasons why so much 
interest centers in the region about Boston Bay. Art, Uterature and 
all phases of human achievement have een and are so prominent 
that the city has long been called "the Hub." 

Providence, Rhode Island, owes its foundation to the principle 
that the government has no right to interfere with a man's religious 
views. -In 1636 this principle was recognized by few, and for 
boldly advocating it Roger Williams was banished from Massachu- 
setts. In the same year he established a colony where is now located 
the city of Providence. 

The capital of our smallest state is situated upon both banks of 
the Providence River at the head of Narragansett Bay, about .35 
miles from the sea. The city, which has a south exposure, is sheltered 
by hills on the north. As a result, the temperature of Providence 
is slightly higher than is that of Boston, which is only about 40 
miles north. 

In early days there was much timber in southern New England, 
and Providence was an exporter of lumber. Owing to the favorable 
situation of the city, the large bay and the existence of water power 
close at hand, both commerce and industry developed. About 1840 
the foreign commerce of Providence began to decline because the 
depth of the water in the bay was not sufficient to acconmiodate the 
largest ocean liners. The channel has recently been deepened con- 
siderably, thus increasing the commerce of the city. 

As an industrial center Providence is very important. Worsted 
goods are made in great quantities, and there are large cotton mills. 
For more than a century the manufacture of jewelry has been a 
leading industry, and the annual output is worth several millions of 
dollars. Gold and silver ware, iron and steel products, and locomo- 
tives are other things manufactured extensively. The water supply 
of the city comes from the P^wtucket River, which has its source in 
the hills to the north and west. In 1920 Providence had a population 

of about 260,000. 

STUDIES 

Why has New England such a large population? What evidence that the 
coast line of New England has been depressed during recent geological times? 
Discuss the ways in which the action of the glaciers benefited New England. 
How is the geology of New England related to economic conditions? Where 
are the conditions unfavorable for agriculture? Where does New England 
get her ooal? Why has population increased more slowly during recent years 



392 Geography 

in New England than on the Pacific Coast^ How does the Cape Cod Canal 
benefit New England? What principle is brought out by a comparison of the 
climate of New England with that of the Pacific Coast of the United States in 
the same latitude? 

REFERENCES 

Brigham, Albebt Perrt: "Geographic Influences in American History/' 

chapter ii. 
Davis, William M.: "The Physical Geography of Southern New England." In 

"Physiography of the United States/' pp. 269-904. 
Emerson, Philip: "General Truths in Geography as Illustrated by New England 

Relief and life." Jofur, cf Oeog,^ vol. x, p. 20. 
Hubbard, George D.: "New England: Her Forests and Her People." BvU, 

Geog. Soc, qf Phil., vol. xii, p. 27. 

Keir, Malcolm: "Some Influences oi the Sea Upon the Industries of New Eng- 
land/' Geog. Rev. 6: 399, May, 1918. 

Lefferts, Walter: "New England Farming: Its Present and Future " Jovr. 

of Oeog.f vol. xi, p. 190. 
Packard, Leonard O.: "The Decrease in Population Along the Maine Coast." 

Geog. Rev., vol. ii, p. 334. 



CHAPTER XXXIX 

New York State 

General Statement. — New York rather than Pennsylvania is 
the Keystone State. It has exerted a greater influence upon the devel- 
opment of our country than has any other state, and this influence 
is the result of geographic conditions. One of the few natural routes 
into the interior of the United States passes across New York, and 
beside the seaward entrance to this route stands New York City. 
Through this gateway there passed, in 1910, thirty-seven per cent, 
of our entire exports and fifty-eight per cent, of our total imports. 
Practically all of our immigrants, about 1,000,000 yearly previous 
to 1915, land in New York City. New York State leads the Union 
in population, wealth, value of manufactures and bank clearings. 

Topography. — The map shows that in general the eastern and 
southern sections of New York are hilly or mountainous and the 
central and western sections are lowland. The east and the west are 
connected by the Hudson-Mohawk depression. 

The Adirondack Mountains, in the northeastern section, have 
resulted from the dissection of an ancient plateau. The highest peak 
is Mt. Marcy, 5,344 feet in altitude. The Adirondack province is 
largely made up of crystalline rocks of ancient origin. Surroimding 
the highlands is a lowland belt. Owing to the altitude, the winters are 
long and severe The ruggedness of the surface is unfavorable to 
agriculture, but a thin soil, the result of the influence of the glacier, 
is the greatest obstacle. Lack of markets near by and of easy means 
of transportation account for the fact that much timber remains 
in the Adirondack region. Much water power has been developed 
and is used in the surrounding lowlands in the manufacture of wood 
pulp. There is some iron in the region, and there are smelters at 
Fort Henry and Crown Point. The Adirondack province is one 
of sparse population. 

In the southeastern part of the state is the Catskill province. 

The mountains were greatly eroded and then uplifted. The uplift 

gave the streams renewed power which resulted in the dissection of 

the region. Unlike the Adirondacks, the Catskills are composed 

of horizontal beds of limestone, sandstone and shale. Although less 

lofty than the Adirondacks (3,500-4,200 feet), the region is suflSciently 

393 



394 Geography 

rugged to have greatly restricted settlement. This condition of the 
surface has its advantage, however, for the beauty of the scenery 
as well as a large state park attract many summer visitors. 

Lumbering is carried on to some extent, and the sheep and dairy- 
ing industries are important. The population is sparse. The Cate- 
kill province is a drainage center from which the Hudson, the Dela- 
ware and the Susquehanna draw water. The city of New York has 
expended a vast sum of money in order to secure a water supply 
in the Catskill Mountains. 

The Lake plains are bounded on the south by the Niagara Escarp- 
ment, which extends from Rochester westward into Canada. The 
Niagara River drops over this escarpment at Niagara Falls. As the 
soils are fertile and the climate is modified by the lakes, the province 
is well adapted to agriculture. The soil is largely glacial till produced 
by the grinding up of the local limestone and shale. 

The Mohawk-Hudson depression is one of the most strongly 
marked physiographic provinces of the state. The work of the 
glacier united an east-sloping and a west-sloping valley, thus form- 
ing the present Mohawk valley. The rocks in the Mohawk 
depression are largely shales of slight resistance, hence a broad 
valley has developed. 

The Mohawk-Hudson depression forms the most important 
route of travel in the state, and one of the most important in the 
world. The New York Central and Hudson River Railroad follows 
this depression. The Mohawk Valley varies from twelve to twenty 
miles in width and is about ninety miles long. 

Hydrography. — The Hudson is the most important river in New 
York, and commercially it is one of the most valuable in the United 
States. From its source in the Adirondacks the river has a length 
of some 300 miles. The drowning of the river valley produced deep 
water as far north as Albany, to which point the tide ascends. 
Through boats run from New York City to Albany. 

Borings made in the bed of the Hudson show that east and a 
little south of the Catskill Mountains it is from 750 to 900 feet to 
bed rock. In other words, there is here a sediment-filled valley 
formerly nearly 1,000 feet deep. The sediments extend below present 
sea level. Soundings carried on ofif the mouth of the river have 
revealed a submarine canyon in one place 3,800 feet in depth. As a 
valley could not be eroded in this depth of water, we have here a proof 
of the subsidence of the region. The submarine valley of the 
Hudson has been traced about 120 miles. 



New Yobk State 395 

At many places along the upper Hudson power has been devel- 
oped. Among these may be mentioned Glens Falls and Cohoes at 
the junction of the Hudson and the Mohawk. The Mohawk has 
developed many falls which have led to the location of towns and the 
growth of industries. 

A part of the drainage of the state is carried southward by the 



]. 1S6.— The HudMia ] 



Susquehanna and the Allegheny. Owing partly to the proximity 
of the Pennsylvania coal fields, Binghampton, Elmira and other 
towns of importance have developed in the Susquehanna Basin, 

The Genesee flows entirely across the state. At Rochester there 
is a fall which in early days was used to operate grist mills. It now 
gives rise to various lines of manufacturing. 

For a considerable distance the St. Lawrence forms the boundary 
between New York and Canada. This part of the state is sparsely 
populated, and the river is ice-bound for several months each year. 
It is not, therefore, of much commercial value to New York. 

From the standpoint of power, the Niagara is of more value to 



396 Geography 

the state than is any other river. Its power was first made use of in 
1725, when a saw niill was erected a Fort Niagara. At the Niagara 
Falls there is a tremendous volume of water — on the average about 
1,000,000 tons drop over the precipice each minute. The flow is 
remarkably uniform because the lakes serve as gigantic reservoirs. 
The maximum flow is only about 35 per cent, greater than the mini- 
mum. This is a great advantage commercially. It is estimated that 
if the entire flow could be utilized, a total of about 5,000,000 mechani- 
cal horse-power could be developed. A treaty entered into between 
the United States and Canada on May 5, 1910, limits the amount 
of power which may be developed. Both countries have nearlj'- 
reached the limits fixed by the treaty. In our country about 200,000 
horse-^power has been developed, and in Canada nearly twice 
this amount. 

A plan is on foot for the construction of reservoirs in various 
parts of New York State which will greatly increase the amount 
of power. In 1907 the state inaugurated the policy of making a 
charge for granting franchises for power development. This will 
greatly increase the state's revenue. The rates vary according to 
the amount of power developed. Water power in New York is very 
important, as the state has practically no coal. 

In large part due to the action of the ice. New York has many 
lakes, such as the Finger Lakes. Her frontage upon two of the Great 
Lakes, especially Lake Erie, gives her a decided commercial advan- 
tage. As will be pointed out later, these lakes have an important 
bearing upon the climate and the agriculture of western New York. 

Lake Champlain has some commercial importance because it is 
along the line of a natural route of travel between New York City and 
the St. Lawrence. As has already been shown, physical conditions 
in this part of the state hinder development. . Most of the many small 
lakes in the state are chiefly important from the scenic standpoint. 

Influence of the Glacier, — The results of the glacier have already 
received some attention. As in New England, the ice removed much 
soil from the uplands. Considering the state as a whole, the ice 
was a great benefit to agriculture. There are comparatively few 
boulders in New York because the surface strata of the prevailing 
rocks, limestone and shale, were readily ground into the soil. The 
ice blocked stream courses and made possible development of much 
power. Lake basins were formed in large numbers, some of which now 
serve as reservoirs, thus regulating stream flow, and most of which 
add a charm to the landscape. 



New York State 397 

Glacial topography is strongly marked in New York State. 
Drumlins are numerous between Syracuse and Rochester. Along the 
Mohawk and the Hudson there are great quantities of rock-flour 
which was deposited by the streams issuing from beneath the ice. 
This has led to the development of the brick and pottery industries. 

Climate. — The climate of New York State is most variable in 
the northeast owing to the distance of this section from large bodies 
of water. Here the winters are long and the snowfall considerable. 
The western part of the state has a more uniform climate because 
of the influence of the lakes. These bodies of water prevent early 
autumn and late spring frosts. As a result, fruits are successfully 
cultivated; grapes, apples and peaches being grown. No part of the 
state receives less than 25 inches of rain per year. The annual rain- 
fall is about 40 inches, very uniformly distributed as to months. 
The average annual temperature of New York City is 51*^ F. The 
yearly range is great, amounting to 43° F. 

As New York is practically in the path of the average cyclonic 
storm as it leaves the United States, her precipitation, number of 
rainy days and percentage of cloudy weather are high. Bufifalo has 
on the average 170 rainy days annually, with a percentage of 
cloudy weather reaching 62. New York City has 131 rainy days 
and cloudy weather for 50 per cent, of the time. 

Mineral Wealth. — As already stated. New York State has little 
mineral wealth. In the Adirondack province some iron is smelted. 
The building stones in this region are too far from large cities and 
from easy means of transportation to be of great value. Salt springs 
led to the establishment of Syracuse, and the Mohawk valley pro- 
duces much salt today. 

Routes of Travel. — From the earliest times the Hudson-Mohawk 
has been the great route across the state. By no other route is the 
lift between the Atlantic seaboard and the interior so slight, the 
divide being crossed at an altitude of 445 feet. Naturally, this route 
was followed by a railroad, the first section being built from Albany 
to Schenectady in 1826. The great New York Central and Hudson 
River Railroad now follows this natural route. The Erie Railroad 
crosses the mountains at Castile at an altitude of 1,401 feet. The 
New York, Ontario and Western reaches an altitude of 1,800 feet; 
the Delaware and Lackawana, 1,932 feet; the Lehigh, 1,728 feet; the 
Pennsylvania, 2,161 feet, and the Baltimore and Ohio, 2,620 feet. 

Another natural route leads from the Hudson valley northward 
past Lake George and Champlain and down the valley of the Riche- 



398 Geography 

lieu to the St. Lawrence. This j-oute is today followed by the Dela- 
ware and Hudson Railroad. In 1823 the Hudson River and Lake 
Champlain were connected by a canal. 

On October 26, 1825, the Erie Canal was opened. Military as 
well as commercial considerations led to the construction of this 
waterway. It is said that the possibiUty of another war with Eng- 
land turned the vote in favor of the canal when the matter was before 
the State Legislature. 

When the canal was opened the cost of shipping goods by wagon 
from Albany to Buffalo was $88.00 per ton. In 26 years the freight 
had fallen to $5.98 per ton, and it is now about $1.00 per ton. The 
opening of the canal gave a value to land in central New York be- 
cause it afforded a means of marketing crops. Cheap transportation 
not only developed the state but was of great importance to the 
United States as a whole, and it even reduced the price of wheat 
in England. 

The new Barge Canal, which cost the state about $150,000,000, 
affords twelve feet of water, and will thus be of great conmiercial 
value, although this depth is not sufficient. The old route is followed 
much of the way. From any point west of Buffalo the St. Lawrence 
route to Liverpool is shorter by 450 miles than is the Mohawk- 
Hudson route. This means that in order successfully to compete 
with the river, the Barge Canal should be much more than twelve 
feet deep. 

Agriculture. — New York State ranks very high in agriculture. 
On the Lake Plains, in much of the central part of the state and in 
a part of the lower Hudson valley from 90 to 95 per cent, of the land 
area is in farms. In Hamilton County, in the Adirondack region, 
but 5 per cent, of the land area was in 1909 in farms. Although the 
population of the state increased 25 per cent, during the decade 
closing in 1910, the total farm area decreased 2.7 per cent. 

In the total value of her dairy products New York holds very 
high rank. Large areas are suitable to dairying which are not adapted 
to tillage. The large population is another cause for the extension 
of the industry. Each year a very large part of the milk produced 
in the state was sold in this form. Milk trains from Jefferson and 
St. Lawrence Counties carry milk 300 miles to New York City, which 
consumes an enormous quantity. In addition to the counties men- 
tioned, Oneida, Otsego, Livingstone, Monroe and Niagara Counties 
are important in the industry of dairying. 

New York, although so important in manufacturing, is one of 



New York State 399 

the leading agricultural states in tl)e Union when the total value 
of farm crops is considered. In the production of potatoes, hay, 
buckwheat, apples, grapes and rye it holds very h^h rank. 

Industries.^ — Water power, cheap transportation, an excellent 
harbor on the Atlantic Coaat, a large state population and good 
markets in the interior of the United States led to the development 
of manufacturing. 

Albany is at the head of navigation on the Hudson and is at the 
crossing of the east-west and north-south routes of travel. There 
is but one bridge over the river south of the city. An added signifi- 
cance is given the city because it is the state capital. 



Fia, 157— Skyline of New York City. 

Troy, but six miles north of Albany, is noted for the manufacture 
of collars, culTs and laundry machinery. Cohoes, just north of Troy, 
is situatedupon falls, power from which ia utilized in the manufacture 
of knit goods. 

At Gloversville some Scoteh settlers began the manufacture of 
gloves in 1809. Nearly one-third of the glove factories in the United 
States are now located there. At Little Falls the Mohawk has cut 
down to gneiss rock, thus producing a waterfall. 

Rome is situated where formerly there was a carrying place 
coxmecting the Mohawk with the Oswego. Syracuse is located over 
salt deposits resulting from the fact that an arm of the sea once 
extended up the Hudson and across central New York. At Rochester, 
on the Falls of the Genesee River, power was early used in the manu- 
facture of flour. 

New York City. — From the points that have already been devel- 
oped, the cause of the preeminence of New York City can be worked 
out. Subsidence caused the formation of a lai^e and well-protected 
harbor having deep water. The important Hudson-Mohawk route 



400 Geography 

leads directly to Buffalo on Lakje Erie, and to all parts of the interior. 
New York City is today our chief seaport, largest city, and one of 
our greatest manufacturing centers. In 1920 its population was 
about 5,600,000. Because of the immense volume of business, it is 
our chief money market. Its very large foreign population places 
before the city social and political problems of unusual magnitude. 

At the entrance to the lower bay there is a bar extending from 
Sandy Hook to Coney Island, formed by drifting shore sand. As a 
result of dredging, deep channels were secured. To meet the needs 
of the great ships of today, the Ambrose Channel was recently dredged 
for a distance of 7 miles. It is 40 feet deep, 2,000 feet wide and cost 
$6,000,000. The water in the Narrows has a maximum depth of about 
120 feet and the Upper Bay affords anchorage for the largest liners. 

The great disadvantage which attaches to New York is found in 
her limited area. This gives to real estate an enormous value and 
industries requiring large areas cannot be carried on there. The high 
price of land is responsible for the lofty buildings and the congestion 
of population. 

Owing to the fact that the Hudson at New York is not bridged, 
nearly all of the railroads terminate in Jersey City. The New York 
Central and Hudson River Railroad enters the city by way of the 
Hudson valley. The New York, New Haven and Hartford enters 
along the north shore of Long Island Sound, and the Pennsylvania 
Railroad, at a cost of about $50,000,000, has constructed tunnels 
under the river. Thus New York is only indirectly an important 
raihoad center. 

One of the great problems which New York City has had to solve 
is that pertaining to an adequate water supply. Originally water 
was obtained from wells. In 1842 Croton River water reached New 
York through an aqueduct thirty miles long. In 1890 a new aqueduct 
was constructed, and still later a great dam was built which caused 
the formation of a lake twenty miles in length. 

This supply was not sufficient to meet the growing needs, and on 
June 30, 1907, the Catskill Aqueduct was commenced. The aque- 
duct which conveys the water is about ninety miles long and can 
furnish 500,000,000 gallons per day. The total cost was about 
$160,000,000. The aqueduct passes under the Hudson River near 
West Point and. under the East River to Brooklyn. Before the 
completion of the aqueduct, Brooklyn obtained her water supply 
from wells and streams. The aqueduct was completed and began 
supplying water in 1917. 



New York State 401 

Buffalo. — To the fact that Nature placed the Niagara Falls 
between Lake Erie and Lake Ontario is due, in very large measure, 
the commercial importance of Bufifalo. The position of the falls 
made it necessary that the Erie Canal should have its western terminus 
south of them and practically where Bufifalo is now located. Hence 
at the foot of Lake Erie was bound to develop a great lake port and 
transfer point. Another important geographic factor is the Bufifalo 
River, at the mouth of which the city was located. Dredging has 
afforded a large harbor and a depth of 23 feet. 

Bufifalo is a great grain and lumber market and an important 
railroad center. She produces iron and steel goods, automobiles, 
flour and soap in large quantities. Meat packing is a very large 
industry. Manufacturing is stimulated by the nearness of Niagara 
Falls, from which much electrical energy is transmitted. Owing 
to the position of Bufifalo she carries on a large trade with Canada. 

Distribution of Population. — Although New York ranks 29 in 
area, she ranks first in population. The distribution is strikingly 
governed by physiographic conditions. The Mohawk-Hudson 
depression contains a large part of the population of the state. 
* 'Except that of the Delaware, the basin of the Hudson contains a 
greater population in proportion to its size than any other important 
river basin in the United States."* 

The influence of topography upon the distribution of population 
is well shown in New York State. In 1910 Essex County had 18 
persons per square mile, Hamilton County 25, Cattaraugus County 
48, and Chautauqua County 98. 

In 1910 the foreign-bom population of New York State was 30 
per cent, of her total population. In this regard Rhode Island ranked 
first with 33 per cent., Massachusetts second with 31 per cent., and 
Connecticut fourth with 29 per cent. In the same year 20 per cent, 
of the foreign population of the United States was in New York. 
She had, in 1910, 35 per cent, of our total Italian-bom population, 
34 per cent, of the Russian-bom, 20 per cent, of the French-born and 
27 per cent, of those bom in Ireland. 

STUDIES 

Discuss the influence of the Mohawk -Hudson depression upon the develop- 
ment of New York State. Compare the importance of the Hudson River with 
that of the Connecticut. Why is Lake Erie of greater value to New York State 
than is Lake Ontario? Why are the streams in New York so important indus- 

* Water Supply and Irrigation Paper No. 202. p. 18. 
26 



402 Geography 

irially? Compare the results of glaciation in New York with the results in New 
England. Why has Buffalo a greater number of rainy days than has New York 
City? What phases of agriculture are most important in New York? Discuss 
the advantages and disadvantages growing out of the position of New York 
City. Why has New York State such a large foreign population? 

REFERENCES 

Bbrkey, Charles P.: "The Catskill Water Supply for New York City." Jour. 

of Geog.j vol. x, p. 231. 
Brigham, a. p.: "Geographic Influences in American History," chapter i. 
Brtgham, a. p.: "The Population of New York State." The Geographical 

Review, vol. ii, p. 206. 
Emerson, F. V.: "A Geographic Interpretation of New York City." Jour, of 

Geog.f vol. x, p. 228. 
Gilbert, G. K.: "Niagara Falls and Their History." In "Physiography of the 

U. S.," pp. 203-236. 
International Geography, p. 729. 

McFarlane, Charles T.: "The Erie Canal." Jour. ofGeog;, vol. x, p. 219. 
Semple, Ellen Churchill: "American History and Its Geographic Conditions," 

p. 1. 
Showalter, William J.: "New York, Metropolis of Mankind," Nat. Geog. 

Mag., vol. xxxiv, p. 1 
Tarr, R. S.: "The Physical Geography of New York State." 
Tarr, R. S.: "The Larger Physiographic Features of New York State." Jour. 

of Geog., vol. x, p. 209. 
Whitbeck, R. H.: "Geographical Influences in the Development of New York 

State." Jaw. cf Geog., vol. ix, p. 119. 



CHAPTER XL 

The Atlantic Coastal Plain 

General Statement. — When the colonists landed upon the 
Atlantic shore of what is now the United States, they found a plain 
of varying width stretching from New Jersey southward. The fertile 
soil, favorable climate and numerous streams navigable for short 
distances led to the comparatively rapid settlement of the region. 
The mountain barrier on the west, with its dense forests and savage 
Indians, retarded the advancing frontier so that for two centuries 
after the founding of Jamestown nearly all of the population was 
found on the Atlantic Coastal Plain. 

Description. — The plain averages about 40 miles in width in 
New. Jersey and expands to 100 miles or more in the Carolinas. The 
rocks are geologically recent and are sedimentary in character. The 
plain was formerly a part of the continental shelf which has been 
elevated above the sea. 

To the westward the plain merges into the hilly or plateau section 
known as the Piedmont. This region was once rugged, and after 
long-continued erosion was elevated. The rocks are ancient and 
crystalline. Faulting has occurred along the line, or rather zone, 
where the two areas join. In this zone are many falls and rapids, 
and the line connecting them is called the fall line. 

Following the uplift the streams extended their valleys farther 
eastward than where they had previously terminated. Later came 
a slight subsidence which resulted in the drowning of the lower parts 
of the valleys, forming many estuaries. Because of this drowning 
practically every stream flowing into the Atlantic afforded trans- 
portation for a few miles inland. The subsidence converted some of 
the coastal portion of the plain into marshes. In the south, the marsh 
land is used for the cultivation of rice. Other portions of the coastal 
region are sandy wastes. Farther from the coast there is fertile 
soil, and agriculture is profitable. 

In Florida geographic influences are marked. Although it has 
1,000 miles of seacoast, it has no important port. Practically all 
of the state is less than 250 feet above sea level, and there is a large 
area in marshes. The precipitation is heavy, but the flatness of the 
land has prevented the formation of many rivers. As the state has 

403 



404 Geographt 

neither water power nor coal, there is little to encourage manufac- 
turing. There is much timber, but the semitropical climate and the 
t'ertile soil are the great assets. 

As the state is essentially agricultural, the population is not large 
although rapidly increasing. During the decade ending in 1910 the 
increase was 42 per cent., a higher percentage than that of any other 



Southern State. Although the largest state east of the Mississippi 
River, the total population in 1919 was only about 1,000,000, and 
Jacksonville, the largest city, had a population of only about 80,000. 
Hydrography. — Owing to abundant precipitation, the coastal 
plain is well supplied with rivers. The sinking of the land caused 
the lower portions to flow sluggishly and as a result much of the land 
is not well drained. Dismal Swamp, having an area of about 700 
square miles and situated in southern Virginia and northern North 




MAP OF ATLANTIC COASTAL PLAIN 



The Atlantic Coastal Plain 406 

Carolina, is an illustration. In this swampy region is Dnunmond 
Lake, the waters of which are held in place by a rim formed of decayed 
vegetation. "The mound of vegetable debris in the summit of which 
Lake Drummond is situated is from 20 to 30 miles broad and rises 
some 12 feet above tide level. The lake is nearly circular, from 2 to 
2J^ miles in diameter, and from 6 to 10 feet deep." ^ 

Vast areas in Florida are so recent and so close to sea level that 
they are undrained. The Everglades in the southeastern part of the 
state are swampy tracts carrying considerable tree growth. The soil is 
rich and generally covers a limestone or coral foundation. A large 
part of the Qpastal plain is south of the glaciated area, hence there 
are few lakes. An exception is found in Florida, where, owing to the 
geological recentness and the slight altitude, lakes are numerous. 

The rivers have been and are closely connected with the develop- 
ment of the Atlantic Coastal Plain. The tidal portions furnish cheap 
transportation and opportunity for the location of harbors. Points 
of reshipment were naturally established at the heads of navigation, 
and along the fall line power was developed. In addition, the river 
valleys furnish the best routes for railroads. The fall line may be 
traced from the mouth of the Raritan, in New Jersey, to Macon, 
Georgia. Trenton, Philadelphia, Port Deposit, Baltimore, Wash- 
ington, Richmond, Petersburg, Raleigh, Columbia, Augusta, Macon 
and other cities are situated upon or very close to it. 

The Delaware is navigable to Trenton. The river outranks the 
Clyde in shipbuilding. Steel is easily obtained and skilled labor 
and capital are at hand. Pottery making is important in the valley 
because of valuable clays. The Schuylkill, which enters the Delaware 
at Philadelphia, furnishes the city with a large part of its water supply. 

The upper part of the Potomac valley is rugged. The steep 
slopes and the absence of lakes are responsible for floods in the lower 
part. This condition makes the river less valuable than it would 
otherwise be as a source of power. Ocean-going ships navigate the 
river to the fall line. The Baltimore and Ohio Railroad follows the 
river for its whole length, and the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal 
parallels it from Cumberland to Georgetown. At Great Falls, about 
15 miles above Washington, there is an excellent opportunity to 
develop power. 

The James is navigable to Richmond. Here power is developed, 
for the river falls nearly 50 feet at this point. Like the Potomac, 
the James is subject to great fluctuations. The Chowan, Roanoke, 

1 Russell: "North America," p. 63. 



406 Geography 

Tar, Neuse and Cape F&ar are all navigable for a conBiderable dis- 
tance. The Pedee is navigable almost acroes the state of South 
Carolina. Camden is the head of navigation on the Wateree. The 
fall line is situated 5 miles above the city and there much power is 
developed. The Congaree is navigable to Columbia, the capital, where 
power is used in the manufacture of cotton goods. The Savannah 
carries ships to Augusta, 250 miles inland. The Oconee is navigable 
to Millcdgeville, and by means of the Ocmulgee ships reach Macon. 
Climate.— On a large part of the Atlantic Coastal Plain the climate 
is very mild. A portion of Florida has a tropical climate. Our 



Boutheaatem coast is subject to greater temperature ranges than is 
our western coast in the same latitude, because the climate of the 
former is influenced by the land more largely than is the climate of 
the latter. 

In the southern part of the province the precipitation is heavy 
and vegetation is in consequence luxuriant. Bananas, pineapples 
and citrus fruits are grown in Florida, and upon the lowlands from 
South Carolina to the Gulf snow is practically unknown. 

Soil. — A large part of the Coastal Plain is south of the glaciated 
area, and therefore the boulders of New England and the glacial 
soils of New York are lacking. The abundant moisture and the rank 
vegetation have disintegrated the rocks, forming in most sections 
a deep layer of fertile soil. There are areas near the coast where 
sand prevails -to such an extent that agriculture is not profitable, and 
as a result there is a sparse population in these sections. 



The Atlantic Coastal Plain 407 

Agriculture. — The leading occupation of the Coastal Plain is 
agriculture. For a long time tobacco was the staple crop in Virginia. 
Today in the Carolinas and in Georgia cotton is the chief crop. Much 
tobacco, rice and sugar are produced. So much of Florida is swamps 
that agriculture is not possible in all sections. Citrus fruits are 
produced in large quantities, the state ranking next to California. 
In Greorgia immense quantities of peaches are grown, and truck- 
farming is important in most of the states. 

The following table shows the gradual growth of industrial condi- 
tions in the southern part of the Coastal Plain. 

TABLE 49. 
Rural Population in Certain States.* 

state Year Population 

North Carolina 1880 96 per cent. 

'' 1890 92 per cent. 

" " 1900 90 per cent. 

" " 1910 85 per cent. 

South Carolina 1880 92 per cent. 

" " 1890 89 per cent. 

" " ' 1900 87 per cent. 

" " 1910 85 per cent. 

Georgia 1880 90 per cent. 

" 1890 86 per cent. 

" 1900 84 per cent. 

" 1910 79 per cent. 

Virginia 1880 87 per cent. 

1890 82 per cent. 

1900 81 per cent. 

1910 76 per cent. 



it 
if 

a 



Forests. — Upon the sandy areas near the coast there are forests 
which yield naval stores. North Carolina is one of the chief states 
in the Union in the production of lumber, and Florida leads in the 
output of naval stores. In North Carolina yellow pine and oak 
are the most important commercially, and in Florida yellow pine 
and cypress. 

Mineral Wealth. — The Atlantic Coastal Plain is not rich in 
minerals, although it is not without this resource. North Carolina 
has gold, iron, copper, coal and even diamonds. In South Carolina 
and in Florida there are phosphate deposits of great value. Georgia 
exports some marble. Near Port Deposit, in Maryland, granite is 

• Thirteenth Census (1910), vol. 1, p. 59. 



408 Geography 

quarried, for which the Susquehanna and Chesapeake Bay afford 
water transportation. 

Manufacturing. — Largely owing to the development of power 
and electrical energy frotn water power, the Coastal Plain is 
rapidly developing its manufactures. No longer is all of the cotton 
being sent to Europe and New England to be manufactured. The 
raw material, the power, the cheap labor and the capital give to the 
South a tremendous advantage. The climate favors the development 
of power, since the streams are open all of the year. 

Along the fall line and farther inland as well, the South is using 
water and electrical power in the numerous cotton mills. Over 
500,000 horse-power, is now in use, and the total available energy 
is estimated at 3,000,000. The energy is in many cases transmitted 
50 or even 100 miles. It is estimated that within 60 miles of Char- 
lotte, North Carolina, there is 100,000 horse-power available. 

Charlotte and Raleigh, North Carolina; Richmond, Virginia; 
Greenville, South Carolina; Atlanta and Augusta, Georgia, are a 
few of the cities to which the streams furnish electrical energy. 

TABLE 50. 
Manufacture op Cotton Goods in 1910. 

Per cent, of total 
State Value Rank .output in U. S. 

Massachusetts $186,462,313 1 30 

North Carolina 72,680,385 2 11 

South Carolina 62,929,585 3 10 

Georgia 48,036,817 4 7 

There are a larger number of cotton mills in North Carolina than 
in Massachusetts, the figures for 1910 being 281 and 182. In the 
decade closing in 1910 Massachusetts increased the value of her 
cotton output 67 per cent.; in North Carolina the increase was 156 
per cent.; in Georgia 160 per cent.; in Alabama, 172 per cent., and in 
Virginia, 182 per cent. New England seems certain to lose her 
prestige in the cotton industry owing to the greater advantages 
possessed by the cotton growing states. 

CITIES 

Philadelphia. — The greatest city on the Coastal Plain south of 
New York is Philadelphia, at the junction of the Delaware and 
Schuylkill Rivers. Although situated 103 miles from the sea, it 
18 reached by ocean-going vessels. This is due to the drowning of 



The Atlantic Coastal PuiiN 409 

the lower valley of the Delaware. Excellent facilities for shipment 
both by rail and water have placed the city close to the front among 
our seaports. Its easy access to coal, iron and petroleum has caused 
it to become a great manufacturing center. 

Philadelphia obtains her water supply chiefly from the Schuylkill 
River, although the Delaware furnishes some. The water is filtered 
before being used. 

For the purpose of showing more intelligibly the industrial 



Fia. 160.— Looking north on Brood Street tonrd City Hall. PhiladelphiK. 

conditions, the Census Reports include Philadelphia in a great 
metropolitan district. There are in the district six cities in addition 
to Philadelphia, besides many boroughs and townships. Cheater 
is the only one of the six cities situated in Pennsylvania: the others, 
Beverly, Burlington, Camden, Gloucester and Woodbury, are in 
New Jersey. 

In the metropolitan district there are a large number of manu- 
facturing establishments. These employ in the aggregate about 
500,000 persons. Several hundred million dollars are paid out annu- 
ally in wages and salaries, and the value of the goods manufactured 
yearly is enormous. Most of the establishments are in Philadelphia ; 
and the value of the goods manufactured in this city is probably 
equal to three-fourtha of the value of those made in the district. 



410 Geography 

From the standpoint of the output, the woolen and worsted 
industry ranked first, printing and publishing second, the refining 
of sugar third, and foundries and machine shops fourth. The making 
of men's and women's clothing is one of the leading industries. 
Petroleum is refined, carpets made, and ships and locomotives built. 
The city is our greatest leather center. In 1920 the population of 
the city was about 1,800,000, an increase of 17 per cent, as compared 
with the population of 1910. 

Historically Philadelphia is of great interest. It was founded 
by William Penn, and for years w&s the home of Benjamin Franklin. 
In Independence Hall, which yet stands, the Declaration of Inde- 
pendence was signed and the Constitution of the United States 
drawn up. This building is the home of the Liberty Bell, which in 
1915 was taken across the continent and exhibited in several of our 
western cities. Before the founding of Washington, Philadelphia was 
for a time the national capital. 

Baltimore has a splendid situation on the Chesapeake Bay 170 
miles from the sea. It has a deep-water harbor due to the drowning 
of the lower valley of the Patapsco River, and is within easy reach 
of the coal, iron and petroleum of Pennsylvania. 

It has good transportation facilities, and is an important port 
and manufacturing center. Favorable conditions for the growth of 
oysters in the bay have led to the development of the oyster industry. 
Because of the mild climate, fruits and vegetables are grown, and 
Baltimore cans and exports large quantities. 

Washington, our national capital, is not important as a seaport 
or as a manufacturing center. It is situated at the junction of the 
Anacostia and Potomac Rivers in the District of Columbia, the area 
of which is about 100 square miles. The valley of the Potomac 
affords a natural route of travel across the mountains. The Great 
Falls are about 15 miles up the valley from Washington, and there 
water is obtained and light and power developed. 

In 1800 Washington became the capital of our country. The city 
is quiet, clean and beautiful. The very large number of trees adds 
much to the charm of the city. Since 1872 about one-half a million 
dollars have been expended in the purchase of shade trees. The need of 
parks is not felt in Washington, as it is in other large cities, for it is 
almost as though a section of the country had been enclosed in the city. 

Pennsylvania Avenue, the main business street, leads from the 
Capitol to the White House. Other noted buildings are the Congres- 
sional Library, where must be deposited a copy of every book that 



The Atlantic Coastal Plain 411 

is to be copyrighted, the Corcoran Art Gallery, the Smithsonian 
Institution, the Printing Office, the Mint, the Naval Observatory, and 
the Fan-American Building. 

Savannah, at the mouth of the Savannah River, has a large and 
productive back country. It exports great quantities of cotton, and 
is the leading source of rosin and turpentine in the world. The pro- 
duction of turpentine has led to the manufacture of barrels on a 



Fig. 161.— The CapitoJ, WBehinglon. D. C. The oorner-slone o( this building was iaid in 
1792. President WwhinKton amf Maior P. C. L'Knlant eelected the site. Much of Cbe old 
Cspito) was burned by tbe British in 1S14; after the War of 1812, it van rebuilt and eiteaded 

large scale, and also to the making of paints and oils. The cotton 
seed, obtained in such large quantities and formerly wasted, is now 
used in the manufacture of table oil, cottoiene and soap. 

AUanta has come into prominence partly because it is situated 
close to the southern end of the Appalachian Mountains, where 
railroads can easily cross the system. For 350 miles north of the 
city there is no easy route across the mountains. Because of its 
position Atlanta is sometimes called the "Gate City." The situa- 
tion of the city and the productive country surrounding it have 
caused Atlanta to become an important railroad center. It is also 
important industrially because it is located close to iron, coal and 
limestone, and because cotton b grown extensively on the fertile ■ 
lands to the south. In 1920 Atlanta had a population of 200,000, 
a gain of 29 per cent, as compared with the population of 1910. 



412 Geographt 

STUDIES 

What advantages did the Atlantic Coastal Plain offer to the early settlers? 
By means of a wall map trace the position of the fall line, and locate the important 
cities situated upon it. Why is there so much truck farming on the southern 
part of the plain? Why is shipbuilding so important on the Delaware River? 
What conditions account for the rapid increase of manufacturing in the southern 
section of the Atlantic Coastal Plain? What advantages in the location of 
Philadelphia? 

REFERENCES 

FennbmaNi Nevin M.: "The Atlantic Coastal Plain." Annala Association 

of American Geograp?ier8f vol. iv, p. 91. 
"Florida." Nat. Geog. Mag.^ vol. xvii, p. 5. 
"Florida." Nat, Geog. Mag., vol. xix, p. 859. 
Powell, J. W.: "Atlantic Coastal Plains." Physiography of the United States, 

p. 73. 
"South Carohna." Nat. Geog. Mag., vol. viii, p. 152. 
Surface, G. T.: "Physiography of Virginia." BtUl. Am. Geog. Soc., vol. xxxviii, 

p. 741. 
Surface, G. T.: "CUmate and Boundaries of Virginia." Btdl. Am. Geog. Soc., 

vol. xxxix, p. 92. 
Taft, William H.: "Washington, Its Beginning, Its Growth, and Its Future." 

Nat. Geog. Mag.^ vol. xxvii, 221. 



CHAPTER XLI 

The Gulf Plain 

General Statement. — The Gulf Plain is a continuation of the 
Atlantic Coastal Plain. As here considered, it constitutes the states 
bordering upon the Gulf of Mexico rather than the plain proper. 
Like the Coastal Plain, the Gulf Plain has been elevated from beneath 
the sea, and following the elevation came a slight subsidence. As a 
result, the lower courses of the streams have been made tidal, there 
is considerable marshy land close to the coast and there are few good 
harbors. Owing to the sluggishness of the streams, shore currents 
have formed sand bars and islands across the entrances to many of 
the bays. 

Upon the lowlands much rice is grown. A little farther inland 
is a sandy belt of rather infertile soil. Next comes the black soil belt, 
in which the soil has been formed by the decay of the underlying 
limestone. This is the great cotton belt, and here the negro popula- 
tion is the largest. Jackson, Mississippi, and Montgomery, Alabama, 
are in this belt. 

South of Montgomery is a ridge called a cuesta. It has a steep 
slope to the north and a more gentle slope southward. It is composed 
of resistant rocks which have weathered slowly. To the north of 
the cuesta are less resistant rocks, the more rapid decay of which 
has produced the black soils already spoken of. The weak, sandy 
soils of the cuesta support a sparse population, while the rich lands 
to the north are densely populated. 

Climate. — Among the geographic factors very important in 
shaping the development of the Gulf Plain is climate. This province 
has an abundance of rainfall, largely furrished by the winds which 
blow from over the Gulf. The mean annual precipitation varies 
from 50 to 60 inches in most of the area. In the western part of 
Texas there is a large semi-arid region known as the Staked Plains. 
Here the rainfall decreases to 10 inches annually. This aridity results 
from the fact that the Rocky Mountains deprive the westerlies of 
moisture and the rain-bearing winds from the Gulf are deflected 
to the east (right) by the deflective influence of the earth's rotation. 

The temperature upon the lowlands is high. Snow is practically 
unknown and the growing season is long. These climatic conditions 

413 



414 Geography 

are well adapted to the growing of cotton, sugar cane, rice and semi- 
tropical fruits. They also fostered the institution of slavery. Neither 
the large plantations nor the slave labor was conducive to industry 
in a broad sense, hence large cities were slow to develop. The high 
humidity makes a given temperature harder to endure than it would 
be in a dryer climate. This is another factor that has played a part 
in retarding development. 

Rivers. — Only one of the rivers of this province is important 
from the standpoint of navigation — ^the Mississippi. Before the days 
of railroads it was all-important to the states bordering upon it. 
It is yet used to some extent, but railroads have taken a large part 
of the business formerly done by the river. Boats run from New 
Orleans to Memphis, others from Memphis to St. Louis, and yet 
others from St. Louis to St. Paul. From the earliest times the Mis- 
sissippi has been an almost constant source of danger to life and 
property because of its floods. The river has built up a tract of deep, 
fertile soil having an area of more than 10,000 square miles. As the 
stream is constantly aggrading in its lower course its bed is higher 
than the adjacent land on either side. This has necessitated the 
construction of levees. 

The Rio Grande, although a large river, is navigable for a few 
miles only. It is subject to great fluctuations in volume, but for the 
most of the year it is a shallow stream which shifts its channel. Much 
of its water is used for irrigation. Boats of light draft make some 
use of the Colorado, the Brazos, the Red and other streams. In the 
same sense the Alabama is navigable to Montgomery. In the high- 
land sections some power is developed. 

Forest Resource. — The Gulf Plain is rich in timber. For a 
number of years Louisiana has been one of the chief lumber-produc- 
ing states, and has frequently ranked first. Texas has a vast forest 
area stretching from the Nueces on the south to the Red River in 
the north. It is many miles in width and lies to the west of the low 
coastal strip. The other Gulf States have much timber. On the 
lowlands the southern or long-leaf pine predominates, while on the 
uplands there is much hardwood. As a result of the climatic condi- 
tions lumbering is carried on all of the year. The average cut is 
about 3000 board feet per acre. In addition to lumber, the forests 
yield naval stores. , 

Mineral Wealth. — For a long time the mineral wealth of the 
Gulf Plain lay little developed. Some coal was mined in Alabama 
before the Civil War, but not until 1895 did the annual production 



The Gulp Plain 415 

reach 5,000,000 tons. For & number of years Alabama has been one 
of the leading states in the production of coal. 

In 1881 iron was discovered near Birmingham, and this caused 
a boom in the city and in the surrounding country. Alabama ranked 
third as a producer of iron ore in 1915, being exceeded by Minnesota 
and Michigan. 

Texas haa become very prominent as a producer of petroleum. 
Louisiana has a valuable deposit of sulphur near Lake Charles. 



FiQ. 162 — Blast furnace and pig iron Btore-yard at Birmingham, Alabama. The pig iron is 
ready to go to the steel mill to be rolled into railB and ^1 kinda ol atructural meUi. 

The greatest known phosphate beds lie west of Tampa, Florida, 
Building stones are found in several localities, and limestone for 
Sux exists near Birmingham. The province yields salt and natural 
gas also. 

Industries. — Preceding the Civil War agriculture was the all- 
important industry, and for many years after its close the people 
devoted their energies to restoring the country to its former condi- 
tion. Lack of capital was a great obstacle. Agriculture is yet the 
leading industry. As had been shown, the mild climate, the abundant 
rainfall, and the fertile soil greatly favored farming. Growing mar- 
kets in the North as well as at home, improved systems of transpor- 



416 Geography 

tation and agricultural education are human conditions which are 
doing much for the tiller of the soil. Although cotton is the chief 
crop, truck farming is rapidly developing. 

Fishing and oystering are carried on to some extent in the Gulf, 
the oil industry in Texas, the production of sulphur in Louisiana, the 
mining of iron and coal in northern Alabama, cattle raising in Texas 
and lumbering in all of the states. The manufacture of iron, steel 
and cotton goods is now assuming much importance. This is due 
to the development of coal, iron and water power, improvement 
in transportation and increased capital. 

CITIES 

In 1920 the Gulf Plain had but seven cities having a population 
of more than 100,000 each. These were New Orleans, Birmingham, 
Memphis, San Antonio, Dallas, Houston and Fort Worth. 

New Orleans was in 1920 the largest city and the chief port on 
the Gulf Coast. Its situation was chosen by Bienville, Governor 
of Louisiana, in 1718. It is 110 miles from the Gulf „'and just 
where a bend in the Mississippi brings the stream clos^«4o Lake 
Pontchartrain. This was a point of much advantage before the days 
of steamboats, for sailing vessels found even the slow current of the 
Mississippi an obstacle to up-stream travel. 

Standing at the entrance to the Great Mi^issippi Ba^in, New 
Orleans is in a position which is very favorable for commerce.; In 
spite of this, a great port could not have developed here had it not 
been found possible, by means of the jetty system, to maintain deep 
water in one of the ^ ^passes" at the seaward end of the delta. The 
river has a width of about one-half mile and the depth ranges from 
40 to about 200 feet. 

The products of the area tributary to New Orleans, cotton, rice, 
sugar, molasses, tobacco, lumber, are exported to various parts of 
the world. Among the important imports are bananas, coffee, jute 
for sacks, rubber, hides and skins and machinery. The railroads 
now do much of the business formerly done by the river. The open- 
ing of the Panama Canal has brought New Orleans thousands of 
miles nearer to San Francisco, and has. given it a corresponding 
advantage with respect to all of the ports on the western coast of 
North and South America. 

In its lower course the Mississippi aggrades its bed, which is now 
slightly higher than the adjacent land on either side. Because of 
this, New Orleans must be protected by means of levees. It is for- 



The Gulp IVain 417 

tunate for the city, as well as the whole delta, that the Missouri and 
the Ohio are not in flood at the same time. 

The saturated condition of the ground has until recently made 
it impossible to erect great buildings, have basements or an adequate 
sewer system. This difficulty is being overcome by pumping the 



water out of the soil. A supply of good drinking water is obtained 
from the river above the city, and by a process of filtration is ren- 
dered safe for use. 

One of the important industries of New Orleans is the refining 
of sugar. This is due to the large production of sugar in the region 
tributary to the city. 

Bimiinghani is the second largest city in population. At its 
present rate of growth it wOl overtake New Orleans within a few 
years. According to the census of 1920, Birmingham had a popula- 
tion of 178,000. Her gain during the decade closing with 1920 was 



418 Gboohapht 

34 per ceot. Of the cities in the United States each of which in 1920 
had a population of 100,000 or more, Birmin(^am ranked high 
in the percentage of gain. 

As already pointed out, the development of the mineral resources 
of northern Alabama caused great activity in Birmingham. To the 
south is the rich cotton belt with ita laige population, calling for 
supplies of various kinds. Birmingham manufactures iron and steel 
goods of many kinds. Because of the presence of coal, iron and lime- 



Fia. IM.— Galveston BSB wall. 

stone, Birmingham can produce pig iron at a very low cost. Steel 
rails, rods, wire, pipes, plows, machinery, stoves, boilers and, struc- 
tural iron are among the products. In the nearby town of Bessemer, 
steel of this name is made. 

Memphis, the third city in population of the Gulf Plain, baa an 
important position upon a bluff out of the reach of the floodwaters 
of the Mississippi. Hardwood lumber ia shipped because the foresta 
in the region supply this commodity. To some extent furniture is 
manufactured. The city exports much cotton, and is quite an 
important railroad center, 

Galveston. — The rapidly growing production of cotton in Texas 
necessitated the securing of a deep-water harbor. This advantage 



The Gulp Plain 419 

was obtained on the north end of Galveston Island, where the gov- 
ernment built jetties. The channel has a depth of about 30 feet. Here 
is located the city of Galveston, which is two miles from the mainland 
but is connected with it by a causeway carrying rail and wagon roads. 
In 1900 the city suffered terrible loss as a result of a tidal wave 
caused by a hurricane. A sea wall 43^ miles long and 17 feet high 
has since been constructed at a cost of $1,500,000. This, it is be- 
lieved, will protect the city. As an additional improvement much 
of the city was raised 14 feet by means of great quantities of sand, 
for the transportation of which a canal was dug into Galveston. 
This improvement cost $2,000,000. 

STUDIES 

To what extent are the industries on the Gulf Plain the outgrowth of climatic 
conditions? Explain the difference between the climate of the coastal and the 
interior sections of Texas. What does the great depth of the lower Mississippi 
River indicate? Why does the volume of the Rio Grande River fluctuate so 
much? Discuss the development of the mineral resources of the Gulf Plain. 
Why is not New Orleans at the mouth of the Mississippi? What are the factors 
which explain the rapid growth of Biriningham? 

REFERENCES 

Brigham, a. p.: "Geographic Influences in American History," chapter vi. 
Cook, Charles W.: "The Importance of Geographic Factors in the Birmingham, 

Alabama, Iron District." Jour, of Geog.j vol. xvi, p. 180. 
Darton, N. H. : "Texas, Our Largest State. ' Nai,. Geog. Mag.j vol. xxiv, p. 1330. 
Gregory, W. M.: "The Geography of Tennessee." Jour, of Geog., vol. xiii, 

p. '233. 
SiMONDS, Frederick W.: "Geographic Influences in the Development of Texas." 

Jour, of Geog., vol. x, p. 277. 



CHAPTER XLII 

The Appalachian Province 

General Statement. — The Appalachian mountain system extends 
from northern Alabama and Georgia to New England. For about 
1,000 miles it forms a barrier between the Atlantic Coastal Plain and 
the interior of our country. To cross it one must travel 150 miles or 
more. Nowhere are these mountains remarkable for their height, the 
most lofty peak, Mount Mitchell, rising to an altitude of 6,711 feet. 

Lofty mountains once rose where now the Appalachians exist. 
During many centuries they were slowly lowered through erosion 
and atmospheric agencies. Then an uplift occurred which gave the 
rivers new energy, so that in many places they have carved deep, 
steep-walled valleys. The uplift took place so slowly that the streams 
maintained their ancient courses, with the result that many of them 
now flow directly across ridges. 

The Appalachian Province may be thought of as consisting of 
the Piedmont on the east, the Blue Ridge, the Appalachian Valley, 
the Alleghany Front and the Alleghany Plateau. The Blue Ridge, 
which has a maximum width of about 75 miles, is composed of folded 
rocks. The gentle slopes are soil-covered and were originally densely 
forested. Because of these conditions much agriculture is carried 
on find there are beautiful summer homes and good roads. 

The central valley is in reality made up of various parallel valleys 
with intervening mountain ridges. Many different names are locally 
applied. It is an agricultural area of much value, and in Colonial 
days was inhabited by the Cherokees and other Indians. 

The Alleghany Front presents a steep slope to the southeast and 
a gentle slope to the northwest. It merges with the Alleghany Plateau, 
in which the rocks are practically horizontal. 

Economic Relations. — In Pennsylvania and West Virginia the 
province is exceedingly rich in coal and iron, and Inining is an impor- 
tant occupation. Again, in the southern portion there is vast mineral 
wealth. Our most extensive hardwood forests exist in these moun- 
tains. In these highlands rise the streams which are furnishing the 
power which is doing so much for the industrial life on the Atlantic 
Coastal Plain. 

Relation to Travel and Settlement. — In the early days the moun- 
' 420 



The Appalachian Province 



Fia. 165,— OQthea 



422 Geography 

tains were quite a barrier to the westward movement of the popula- 
tion. Nowhere south of the Mohawk depression will a single pass 
carry the traveler across the mountain system. A gap must be found 
in each ridge, and as these gaps are not in line with dne another, the 
journey is longer than it otherwise would be. People traveling on 
foot or on horseback were seriously impeded by the dense underbrush 
which covered the mountains, and the Indians were a constant menace. 

Before the days of railroads, as at the present time, routes of 
travel were in large measure guided by valleys. Hunters, trappers and 
other venturesome spirits were the first to work their way into the 
fertile valleys of the Appalachian Province and on the Central Plains. 

The route from eastern Pennsylvania to Fort Duquesne led up 
the Susquehanna to where Harrisburg now stands. Crossing the 
river, the trail led southwest and then nearly west through gaps 
where two of the southern tributaries of the Juniata head, and then 
south to a gap through which the Youghiogheny flows and thence 
down its valley to Pittsburgh. 

To reach the Kentucky region from Pennsylvania, the path con- 
tinued southward along the valley from Harrisburg, crossed the 
Potomac where now is Harpers Ferry, and led up the valley of the 
Shenandoah to its head near Staunton. Continuing southward, it 
crossed the headstreams of the James, near which a trail from 
Richmond joined it. Onward it led for many miles, followed New 
River to the Holston, down its valley and,through a gap to the Clinch, 
which it crossed and led down the Powell to the famous Cumberland 
Gap, 1,600 feet in elevation. From Fort Chiswell, at the head of 
the Holston, on to the Blue Grass region the trail was known as the 
Wilderness Road. 

Following upon a map the course of this one trail across the 
Appalachian Barrier will give one a good idea of the obstacles en- 
countered by those who traveled in early days. Wagon roads have 
succeeded the trails, and railroads the wagon roads. South of the 
Roanoke the difficulty in crossing the mountains increases owing to 
the increase in altitude. Until 1880 no railroad crossed the system 
for a distance of 350 miles south of this river. The altitudes at which 
a number of railroads cross the Appalachians are given on page 397. 

Climate. — The mountains are sufficiently elevated to cause 
generous precipitation. In the north there is much snow, which 
lingers in sheltered places until late in the spring. In the southern 
part the winter climate is mild because of the influence of latitude. 
The climatic conditions worked against the cultivation of cotton, 



The Appalachian Province 



423 



and hence against slave labor. The mountain dwellers were a serious 
menace to the South during the Civil War, for they furnished large 
numbers of soldiers to the Northern armies. 

Effects of Isolation. — The effects of the most isolated parts of the 
mountains upon the present^ay inhabitants is plainly marked. 
Some of these districts have very inadequate means of communi- 
cating with the outside world. Table 51 shows certain conditions 
as to the population of the counties in western North Carolina and 
Table 52 gives similar information concerning the eastern tier of 
counties in Tennessee. 

TABLE 61. 
Population in Western North Carolina. 

Density per Per cent, of Per cent, native 
County square mile negro pop. white parentage 

Alleghany 33 4 95 

Ashe ....: 46 3 97 

Cherokee 31 4 96 

Clay 18 4 96 

Graham 16 97 

Haywood 38 3 97 

Madison 46 3 97 

Mitchell 46 3 97 

Swain 18 2 90 

Transylvania 19 3 90 

Watauga 39 2 98 

Yancey 40 2 98 

The State 45 32 67 



TABLE 52. 
Population in Eastern Tennessee. 

Density i>er Per cent, of Per cent, native 

County square mile negro pop. white parentage 

Carter 56 3 96 

Cocke 45 5 94 

Greene 51 4 95 

Johnson 45 3 97 

Monroe 31 6 94 

Polk 33 2 97 

Sevier 38 2 98 

Unicoi 36 2 98 

The State 52 22 76 

These figures make it plain that, with few exceptions, the moun- 
tain counties are below the average in density of population. The 



424 Geography 

percentage of negro population is very low because the conditions 
were not favorable to slave labor. The people are practically all 
of native white parentage because the region is not industrial, its 
agricultural conditions are not such as to attract immigrants, and 
it is far removed from the lines of westward travel. 

Owing to lack of easy contact with the outside world, many 
customs persist which have long since disappeared from sections less 
remote. Until quite recently many of the people dressed in homespun 
and carried their wheat to the mills, thus obtaining their supplies of 
flour from their own grain. 

STUDIES 

Why were the Appalachian Mountains so important in determining the 
distribution of the early population? How do the mountains influence the dis- 
tribution of population at the present time? How are the mountains related 
to the nationality of the present population? What are the evidences of geo- 
logical old age in this province? Why are there so few lakes in the southern 
part of the Appalachian Mountains? Give specific examples of the influence 
of the Appalachian Mountains upon life at the present time. 

REFERENCES 

Brigham, a. p.: ''From Trail to Railway in the Appalachians." 
Brigham, a. p.: ''Geographic Influences in American History," chapter iii. 
Hayes, C. Willard: "The Southern Appalachians." In "Physiography of the 

U. S./' pp. 305-336. 
Russell, I. C: "North America," p. 73. 
Semple, Ellen C. : " American History and Its Geographic Conditions," chapters 

iii and iv. 
Willis, Bailey: "The Northern Appalachians." In "Physiography of the 

U. S.," pp. 169-202. 



CHAPTER XLIII 
The East Central States 

General Statement. — The St. Lawrence River and the Great 
Lakes constitute the most important inland waterway in the world. 
This waterway reaches into a part of the United States the geo- 
graphic environment of which is, for the most part, wonderfully 
favorable. The topography encourages agriculture and road build- 
ing. The climate, although continental, is adapted to the staple 
crops of the temperate zone. The soil is fertile, and in the north there 
is yet much timber. Considerable water power is available and the 
mineral wealth is enormous. In addition to the Great Lakes and 
the New York Barge Canal, there are other lines of water transporta- 
tion, chiefly the Mississippi and Ohio Rivers. A network of rail- 
roads places every part of this large area in easy communication 
with all sections of the United States. As a result of the natural 
resources and excellent means of transportation, the five states in 
this group, Ohio, Indiana, Michigan, Illinois and Wisconsin, had in 
1920 about 20 per cent, of the total population of our country. 

Influence of Topography. — This area has comparatively little 
relief. Generally speaking, the surface is rolling or level. In Indiana 
and Illinois there are extensive prairie plains varying from 400 to 
600 feet in altitude. Illinois lies wholly in the prairie plains. In the 
area between the Scioto and the Great Miami some of the hills reach 
an altitude of more than 1,500 feet, and in northern Wisconsin there 
is some rather rough country which exceeds 1,500 feet in altitude. 

In most of the region the levelness of the area greatly encourages 
settlement. Many of the streams are navigable by boats of light 
draft, and wagon and railroads are easily constructed. The wide 
stretches of level land made the use of farm machinery profitable. 

The divide between the St. Lawrence and the Mississippi drain- 
age is so insignificant that in early days two important canals con- 
nected Lake Erie with the Ohio River. This same condition made 
possible the construction of the Illinois and Michigan Canal and 
later the Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal. 

Influence of the Glacier. — Most of this great area was glaciated, 
and glacial topography and glacial lakes are familiar features, espe- 
cially in the north. The choking of the streams by the drift caused 

425 



426 Geography 

many falls and rapids where power is now developed. It is estimated 
that Wisconsin has about 1,000,000 horse-power in the form of 
stream energy, only about one-fourth of which was in use in 1919. 

Much of the soil is of glacial origin. The glacier did much more 
in preparing the soil for the use of man than it did in New England, 
because the rocks are less resistant, being for the most part sand- 
stones and limestones. In the central part of Wisconsin is the 
Driftless Area, Here the soils are residual and are largely the result 
of the disintegration of sandstones. Farms in this section are not 
so productive as they are in the glaciated area farther south, and are 
therefore much less valuable. Much clay was deposited by the 
streams which flowed out from under the ice. This has led to the 
manufacture of brick, tile and pottery. 

Climate. — The great distance of this area from the ocean results 
in a continental climate. The prevailing westerly winds bring to 
these states the high summer and the low winter temperatures of the 
areas to the west. On the south and east shores of the lakes the 
seasonal temperature ranges are not so great as they are on the west 
shores of these bodies of water. 

So great is the volume of water in these lakes that they never 
freeze over, although ice forms along the shores, closing navigation 
for several months each year. Because of the moderating influence 
of the water, late spring frosts are less likely to occiu* near the east 
than the west margins of the lakes. Consequently fruit buds are less 
likely to be killed on the east shore, and the southern part of Michigan 
produces peaches in large quantities, although the parts of Wisconsin 
and IlUnois in the same latitudes do not. 

In the southern part of this section the growing season is much 
longer than it is in the northern part. This is a result of latitude. 
In the northern part of Wisconsin the length of the growing-season 
varies from 100 to 120 days, although in the southern part of Illinois 
it is about 180 days. Corn therefore thrives better in central and 
southern Illinois than it does in northern Wisconsin. Peaches, 
strawberries and other small fruits are raised in abundance in 
southern IlUnois. 

As the average path of the cyclonic disturbances lies over the 
Great .Lakes, there is great variability in weather conditions. There 
is much cloudiness, and the relative humidity is high. Precipitation 
is in all parts ample for agricultural purposes. It increases from north 
to south, where it is approximately 40 inches annually. The pre- 
cipitation is fairly uniformly distributed as to months, although 



The EIast Central States 427 

there is a minimum in the late summer. This is an advantage 
to ripening grain. 

There is a heavy seasonal snowfall in the north and central 
sections, and blizzards are not uncommon. Transportation and 
communication are occasionally seriously interfered with. The 
removal of snow from the streets of Chicago costs a considerable 
sum annually. In many sections the severe winter weather is taken 
advantage of in the harvesting of ice on lakes, ponds and streams. 
Numerous plants for the manufacture of ice have reduced the impor- 
tance of natural ice, however. 

The Forest Resource. — Much of this area was originally heavily 
timbered. In the north this timber was largely white pine and hem- 
lock. Farther south there were splendid forests of hardwood. Much 
of this area was cleared and the timber burned in order to establish 
farms. Owing to the fact that markets could easily be reached by 
water, lumbering has been an industry of vast importance. 

Much timber yet remains in the northern parts of Wisconsin and 
Michigan. In 1920 about one-third of Wisconsin was classed as 
wooded land. Until very recently white pine was the chief commercial 
lumber, but hemlock now holds first place. 

The many streams furnished a means of transporting logs and 
the power for sawing, and towns developed at favorable sawmill 
sites. Owing to rapid deforestation, the sawing of lumber has 
declined. In many cases the same sites are used in the manufacture 
of pulp, furniture, sash, doors, blinds and boxes of various kinds. 
Thus much small material, such as was formerly wasted, is used. 
Many tanneries have been established in Wisconsin because of an 
abundance of tanbark and the great nimibers of hides to be obtained 
in Chicago and Milwaukee. 

The Mineral Resource. — ^The mineral wealth of this region is 
great. Coal is mined in Illinois, Indiana and Ohio. The coa! of 
Ohio is quite largely mined in the Hocking Valley, and hence much 
of it is shipped down the Ohio River. South of Ottawa, Illinois has 
immense deposits of coal. Wisconsin was above water during the 
Carboniferous Age and hence has no coal. 

Both Indiana and Ohio produce petroleum. In Indiana it is 
found in the arch which extends across the central part of the state 
from southeast to northwest. From the region of Lima, Ohio, oil 
is piped to Chicago and to the Atlantic coast. 

In 1884 gas was discovered in Ohio and three years later in Indiana. 
Before it was realized that the supply was exhaustible much of it 



428 Geography 

had been given away or wasted. In spite of this Ohio yet holds a 
high raok among the states as a producer of natural gas. 

Iron County, Wisconsin, has large deposits of iron, and the state 
produces so much zinc that its value is greater than that of the iron. 
In the Northern Peninsula of Michigan there is a great deal of copper. 
Sandstone, limestone, shale and clay are quite widely distribute<l. 
In Berea, Ohio, there is the largest grindstone factory in the world. 
This has resulted from the deposits of sandstone especially adapted 
to the making of grindstones. At East Liverpool and Cincinnati 



there are pottery works, and the extensive clay deposits ia and near 
Chicago are used in the manufacture of bricks on a very lai^e scale. 

In the neighborhood of Saginaw, Bay City, St. Charles and Mt, 
Pleasant, Michigan, and in Ohio, much salt ia produced. Wisconsin 
is one of the leading states in the production of mineral waters. 

Hydrography. — During the open season on the Great Lakes, 
which ia approximately from April 10 to December 1, large quantities 
of iron, copper, lumber and wheat are shipped eastward by the lakes. 
Coal is the most important item in the westward-moving freight. 
As has already been shown, the Great Lakes influence climate and 
hence the products of the soil. They have played a prominent part 
in determinin^f the location of cities and the routes followed by 
railroads. Each of the states has lake frontage, although Indiana 
has but little, and recently commenced to develop a lake port. Mich- 



The East Central States 429 

igan has the advantage of frontage on four of the lakes. The large 
number of small lakes, especially in the northern states of the group, 
have become centers for resorts to which hunters, fishermen and 
seekers for recreation go during the summer. 

The Mississippi is navigable, and during early days was an impor- 
tant line of trade and travel. The rapid development of railroads 
has greatly decreased river trade. The Ohio forms the southern 
boundary of three of the states, and is of considerable commercial 
importance. There is regular boat service between Cincinnati and 
Memphis, a distance of 749 miles. 

The Illinois River and valley have exerted a marked influence 
upon the development of Illinois. One-half of the state is in this 
basin. Many of the early settlers were from the South. They went 
down'ths lower Ohio to the Mississippi, and by this route reached the 
navigable Illinois and the feHile lands in its valley. In 1826 steam- 
boats began to navigate the Illinois. As originally planned, the 
northern boundary of Illinois extended due westward from the 
southern end of the lake. Congress, fearing that the state would 
be settled by people from the South, "changed this so as to give some 
lake frontage. This gave contact with the East as soon as the Erie 
Canal was opened. Until some years after this event the produce 
of the Illinois valley was shipped to St. Louis or New Orleans by flat- 
boats. The Wabash, the Great Miami, the Scioto, the Muskingum 
are all navigable for short distances. The Ohio and Erie Canal 
connected Portsmouth and Cleveland. It follows the valley of the 
Scioto from Columbus southward. Another canal was built from 
Toledo to Cincinnati, making use of the valleys of the Maumee and 
the Great Miami. 

TABLE 53. 

Railway Statistics for Year Ending June 30, 1916.^ 

Miles per 100 square Miles per 10,000 
States Miles miles of territory inhabitants 

Wisconsin 7,693 13.92 30.86 

IlUnois 12,141 21.67 19.81 

Indiana 7,475 20.74 26.59 

Ohio 9,121 • 22.39 17.77 

Michigan 8,875 15.44 29.15 

Utah 2,137 2.60 49.60 

New Jersey 2,337 31.11 7.98 



1 



Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1917, p. 296. 



430 Geography 

Land Transpoxtatioii. — The fertile soil, the forests and the mineral 
wealth, together with the water routes, have led to a rapid develop- 
ment in population. The same conditions have caused the building 
of many railroads. The southward extension of Lake Michigan has 
resulted in making Chicago a great railroad center. 

Industries. — ^Except in the forested sections, agriculture is highly- 
developed. More than nine-tenths of the land area of Ohio and 
six-tenths of that of Wisconsin is in farms. The cereals, hay and 
potatoes are very important crops. In the southwestern part 
of Michigan, in southern Illinois and on the lake plain in Ohio 
peaches and other fruits are grown. 

Wisconsin is now the first state in the Union in the dairying 
industry. It has several thousand cheese plants and creameries. 
The industry is most highly developed in the southern part of the 
state because there are the clayey soils which retain water and there- 
fore promote the growth of graes. Hilly areas in various states in 
this region are in some cases used for dairying because rapid erosion 
unfits them for the most successful agriculture. Dairying is most 
important in the section adjacent to Chicago, as there is a very large 
demand for the products. 

In Illinois the great acreage devoted to corn has led to the hog 
industry. Great quantities of corn are used in the distilling of 
Uquors and in the manufacture of glucose. Owing to its position, 
Peoria leads in this work. 

The extensive development of agriculture in these states has led to 
the manufacture of farm machinery on a large scale. Cincinnati, Indian- 
apolis, Peoria, Rock Island, MoUne and Chicago are noted centers. 

With the great increase in population manufacturing has had a 
rapid development. In 1910 the urban population in these states 
was as follows: Ohio 56 per cent., Indiana 42 per cent., Illinois 63 
per cent., Michigan 47 per cent., and Wisconsin 43 per cent. Table 
54 shows the development of manufacturing. 

TABLE 54. 
Value of Manufactures per Capita in East Central States 

state * 1849 1910 

Ohio $32.00 $302.00 

Indiana 19.00 214.00 

Illinois 19.42 340.38 

Michigan 28.00 244.00 

Wisconsin 30.00 253.00 . 



The East Central States 431 

Although Wisconsin heads the list in per capita value of her 
manufactures, she falls far behind Illinois and Ohio in the total 
value of manufactured articles. In this regard Illinois ranks third 
among the states of the Union. 

cities 

Cleveland, one of the most important of the lake ports, is situated 
at the mouth of the Cuyahoga River. It is built upon three plains 
or terraces rising one above another. Its location is a favorable 
meeting place for the coal of its own and the adjacent states of West 
Virginia and Pennsylvania with the iron from Minnesota and Wis- 
consin. This has led to the manufacture of iron and steel goods of 
all kinds and to shipbuilding. Owing to the increase in the length 
of lake vessels, the river is less advantageous as an anchoring ground 
than it formerly was. 

The opening of the Erie Canal gave an impetus to the growth of 
Cleveland. The Ohio and Erie Canal, which connected it with 
Portsmouth, was another great advantage. Lake Erie furnishes an 
inexhaustible supply of good water and large quantities of fresh fish. 

The city derives power from the ''Great Falls*' of the Cuyahoga 
River. In addition to. ships, it manufactures machinery for unload- 
ing vessels, steel rails, tools, general hardware and automobiles. 
In 1920 its population was about 800,000. 

Cincinnati is an important river port. It is the southern terminus 
of the Miami Canal, which connected Cincinnati with Toledo, and 
which was formerly important. Cincinnati does much business by 
means of the Ohio River. Coal, lumber, salt and clay are brought 
to the city by this route. The city is quite a railroad center. It has 
tanneries and manufsictures wagons, carriages and furniture because 
haj'dwood is available. The presence of good pottery clay has led to 
the manufacture of the famous Rookwood pottery. The packing of 
meat, the manufacture of men^s clothing and boots and shoes are im- 
portant. Cincinnati draws considerable business from Kentucky and 
Indiana. In 1920 she had a population of approximately 400,000. 

Toledo has an important position but a few miles from the shore 
of Lake Erie on the Maumee River. It has a good harbor and 
receives iron, lumber and grain from the west and coal from the 
east. It manufactures railroad cars, automobiles, machinery, glass 
and furniture. 

Columbus, the capital, occupies a very central position. It has 
foundry and machine shops, and manufactures boots and shoes and 



wagons and carriages. It is an important railroad center, and had, 
in 1920, a population of about 237,000. 

Indianapolis occupies a central position in the state of which 
it is the capital, A net of railroads radiates in every direction from 
the city. Cattle from the surrounding country are here converted 



F BAST OERTBAI. STATES 



The East Central States 433 

into meat, and wheat into flour. As the city is located in the corn 
belt, much corn is handled. Indiana produces a great deal of coal 
and Indianapolis controls the trade in this mineral. 

One of the results of the extensive development of agriculture 
in the state is the manufacture in the city of farm machinery and 
tools as well as wagons. The accessibility of hard wood has led to 
the manufacture of furniture. Other industries of importance are 
the making of structural iron, woolen goods and automobiles. The 
population in 1920 was, in round numbers, 314,000. 

Gary, a city which has come into existence .as if by magic, is to 
be Indiana's great lake port. Where now the city stands there was, 
in 1906, nothing but shifting sand dunes. A place was needed where 
steel could be more economically made than in Chicago or Pittsburgh, 
and so Gary came into existence. The United States Steel Corpora- 
tion founded and owns the city. There was no natural harbor, but 
a breakwater was built and a canal and turning-basin constructed. 
Here Lake Superior iron meets coal from Illinois and limestone. from 
both east and west, while coke is manufactured at the plant. A new 
channel was dug for the Calumet River and it was turned into it. 
A tunnel was dug out under the lake to supply water. In many re- 
spects this is the most wonderful city in our country. It has all 
modern conveniences, and had, in 1920, a population of 58,378. 

Detroit, on the river of the same name, is the most important 
city in Michigan. A large part of the commerce of the Great Lakes 
of necessity passes through this city. It is situated where several 
lines of railroad cross the boundary between the United States and 
Canada. The river is about one-half mile in width and from 30 to 
50 feet deep. Trains are ferried across and a double terminal of 
steel and concrete connects Detroit with Windsor, Canada. 

Michigan leads in the manufacture of automobiles, and Detroit 
is her chief center for the manufacture of these vehicles. Cheap 
steel, coal and hardwood and nearness to the great centers of popula- 
tion are favoring conditions. In addition to automobiles, the city 
manufactures cars, machinery, cash registers and tobacco. 

Grand Rapids, the second city in population, is the chief furniture 
manufacturing center in the United States. Accessibility to pine and 
hardwood led to the establishment of the industry, and the impetus 
thus obtained enables the city to maintain its place. 

Chicago. — In 1673 two French missionaries, Joliet and Marquette, 
discovered the Indian village where Chicago now stands. They were 
probably the first white men to reach the spot. In 1803 the govern- 

28 



434 Geoghapht 

ment built Fort Dearborn, and in 1833 the town had a population 
of 150. In 1837 Chicago was incorporated, having a population of 
4,170. Although the city was in large part destroyed by the great 
fire of October, 1871, the federal census of 1930 rfiowed that there 
were within the limits of Chicago about 2,700,000 persons. In a 
century Chicago has grown from an insignificant tiading post to be 



Fio. 168.— Chiciigo Stock Yard, 

the second city in population in the United States and the fourth 
in the world. 

The Chicago River and the harbor at its mouth, the ahnost imper- 
ceptible divide between the St. Lawrence and the Mississippi drain- 
age and the fact that the east to west railroads were obliged to 
round the southern end of Lake Michigan, made it inevitable that 
a great city should grow up where Chicago stands. 

As we have seen, Chicago has the great advantage of cheap 
transportation in securing and reshipping lumber, iron, copper, wheat 
and coal. She has an unlimited supply of puie water for domestic 
purposes and area for the expansion of the city. 

In 1848 the Illinois and Michigan Canal was completed. This 
followed the Chicago River to the Desplaines and continued down 



The East Central States 435 

the valley of this river to La Salle on the Illinois, a distance of 90 
miles from Chicago. The canal was of great benefit to Chicago and 
the tributary coimtry. Grain, potatoes, stone and dressed meats were 
shipped from Chicago, and Imnber, ^oceries, agricultural implements 
and hardware were sent to the small towns along the canal. 

Previous to the opening of the canal, lumber had been very high 
in price in the Illinois valley, as it had to be hauled from Chicago 
by wagon. The decrease in price which followed water transporter 
tion did much for the development of the valley. On April 23, 1848, 
a boatload of sugar reached Chicago from New Orleans by way of 
the. canal. In 1853 the Chicago, Rock Island and Pacific Railroad 
was constructed parallel to the canal, and this led to a rapid dechne 
in its business. 

As Chicago developed, a canal of sufficient capacity to carry 
southward the sewage of the city became a necessity. Accordingly, 
the Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal was constructed. This parallels 
the old canal, but is deeper and wider. Powerful engines pump the 
water of the Chicago River into the canal, whence it flows south- 
ward, finding its way to the Mississippi. When the Illinois and the 
Mississippi Rivers have been deepened, the canal will serve as a 
ship canal. 

Chicago ranks second among the cities of the United States as 
a manufacturing center. First in value of products is the meat- 
packing industry. The city is on the edge of the corn and hog belt, 
and therefore is a natural market for hogs. Large numbers of cattle 
are taken into the com belt from points farther west and there cbmr 
fed for a time before being marketed. 

Cheap transportation and the rapidly growing population of 
Chicago, and the large area for which it is the natural distributing 
center, have caused the city to become a great lumber market. The 
demand for agricultural implements in the prairie states, and the ease 
with which Chicago can provide the steel and wood which enter into 
their construction, have given the city first rank in the manufacture 
of these articles. In 1909 she manufactured 39 per cent, of the total 
output of our country. 

Chicago is noted for the manufacture of cars, machinery, general 
hardware, men's clothing, furniture and refrigerators, bakery goods, 
and for the printing and publishing business. 

Milwaukee. — Lake Michigan and Lake Superior have determined 
the location of most of the important cities of Wisconsin. Chief 
among these is Milwaukee. The primary factor in determining the 



436 Geography 

location of the city was the bay at the mouth of the Milwaukee 
River. Here was a large area of protected anchorage due to a sand 
bar and having a depth inside the entrance of 12 feet or more. These 
natural conditions have been improved by the expenditure of much 
money. On the average the harbor is ice bound only 14 days each year. 

The Menominee River, a small stream, enters the city from the 
northwest and joins with the Milwaukee River, which furnishes 
some power. The lake supplies water by means of an intake which 
extends under the soft shale three-fourths of a mile from shore. 

An abundance of hemlock bark and hides obtained in the city, 
as well as in Chicago, has resulted in giving Milwaukee first rank 
in the tanning industry. Milwaukee is the chief barley market 
in the United States. Flour milling is another industry of consider- 
able importance. 

The city is the chief manufacturing center in Wisconsin, pro- 
ducing in 1910 more than one-third, by value, of the manufactures 
of the state. According to the census of 1920, it had a popula- 
tion of 457,147, and was the only city in the state having more than 
100,000 inhabitants. 

Of all the freight entering Milwaukee by rail, nearly one-third was, 
in 1910, in the form of gr^in. The city is a great coal market. Nearly 
all of this commodity is received by water. About one-half of it is 
used locally and the remainder is shipped to* various points within 
and without the state. 

Superior, although not a large city, ranks among the great ports 
of the world in tonnage^ although not in value of commodities handled. 
It is at one of the termini of the greatest inland waterways in the 
world, is in a region rich in wheat, lumber and iron, and has a mag- 
nificent land-locked harbor. The St. Louis River empties into the 
harbor and the city extends up the river for many miles. 

Great quantities of coal are shipped by water from Pennsylvania, 
West Virginia and Ohio to Superior, from which point it is shipped 
by rail to a large tributary area in which there are no coal deposits. 
As the harbor is closed by ice from three to four months of the year, 
much coal is of necessity stored in the city. Immense amounts of 
iron are shipped from Superior to supply the iron and steel plants 
in Chicago, Gary, Pittsburgh and other points. Wheat from Canada, 
Minnesota and the Dakotas is another important item in the east- 
ward moving freight. Manufacturing is aided by power 4eveloped 
from the St. Louis River. Among the manufactures are flour, 
linseed oil, engines, wind-mills and chairs. 



The East Central States 437 

STUDIES 

How has topography influenced the development of these states? What 
principles in physical geography are brought out by a study of the climate of 
the province? In what part is there most water power? Which of the states 
in the province has the most valuable natural resources? Why is agriculture 
so highly developed? Write a short paper showing all of the ways in which the 
Great Lakes influence the geography of the province. Why is Chicago the most 
important city? 

REFERENCES 

Barrows, Harlan H.: "Geography of the Middle Illinois Valley." Bulletin 

No. 15 f Illinois State Geological Survey. 
Briqham, a. p.: "Geographic Influences in American History," chapters iv, v. 
Carney, Frank: "Geographic Influences in the Development of Ohio." Jour. 

of Geog.f vol.' ix, p. 169. 
Drter, Charles R.: "Geographic Influences in the Development of Indiana." 

Jour, of Geog.y vol. ix, p. 17. 
GooDE, J. Paul: "What Nature Has Done for a Typical City (Chicago)." 

Lessons in Community and National lAfe. Community Leaflet No. 4. 
Gregory, W. M. : "The Geography of Tennessee." Jour. ofGeog., vol. xiii, p. 233. 
Martin, Lawrence: "The Physical Geography of Wisconsin." Jour, of Geog., 

vol. ii, p. 226. 
Ridqley, Douglas C: "Geographic Influences in the Development of Illinois." 

Jour, of Geog.y vol. ix, p. 209. . 
Russell, I. C: "North America," p. 99. 
Whitbbck, Ray Hughes: "The Geography and Industries of Wisconsin." BuU. 

No. 26, Wis. Geological and Natural History Survey. 
Whitbeck, Ray Hughes: "Economic Aspects of the Glaciation of Wisconsin." 

Annals Assn. of Am. Geographers, vol. iii, p. 62. 



CHAPTER XLIV 

The West Centrax States. 

General Statement. — The states which are treated in this chapter 
are Minnesota, Iowa, Missouri, the Dakotas, Nebraska and Kansas. 
Physiographically, a part of the area lies in the Prairie Plains and 
a part in the High Plains provinces. In general it is a region of low 
relief. Nearly the entire area belongs to the Mississippi drainage. 

The population of the area is rather sparse. Missouri has the 
greatest density, 49 per square mile in 1920. In South Dakota in 
the same year the density was but 8 per square mile, and in North 
Dakota the same. Generally speaking, the density decreases from 
east to west owing to the decrease in the mean annual precipitation. 

Surface Features. — In traveling from the Mississippi River 
westward one is scarcely conscious of the ascent, so gradual is it, 
yet when the western margin of the High Plains has been reached 
the traveler is higher than are most of the peaks in the Appala- 
chian Mountains. 

In only a few places is the monotony of the surface features broken 
by an uplift. One of these is the Height of Land which extends in a 
general east-west direction partly across northern Minnesota. It is 
a mountain range eroded nearly to its base and composed of ancient, 
crystalline rocks. The Mississippi rises on the south slope of this 
uplift. In the part known as the Mesaba Range much iron is mined. 

In southwestern South Dakota and in eastern Wyoming there 
is an early circular uplift covering some 6,000 square miles. Viewed 
from the practically treeless plains by which it is surrounded, it 
presents a blue-black appearance due to the timber upon ft, and hence 
the name Black Hills. 

Most of the uplift rises about 2,000 feet above the general level 
of the plains. The highest peak, Mt. Harney, is 7,216 feet above 
the sea. The precipitation is greatest upon the highest parts, and 
here there is most timber. 

The central part of the uplift is composed of resistant slates, 
schists and granites, while surrounding it are sedimentary rocks, 
for the area came into existence as an island. The sandstones and 
shales dip outward from the core. Upon the softer formations 
valleys have developed, while the harder ones stand up as ridges. 
One of the concentric valleys thus developed is Red Valley, so named 

438 



The West Central States 439 

because of itg red sandstones. ,The outer rim of the valley rises 
steeply from 300 to 400 feet, and is caused by resistant sandstones 
and shales. Streams flow outward in all directions from the conmion 
center, most of them uniting with the north and south forks of the 
Cheyenne River 

Owing to their mineral wealth, the Black Hills are much more 
densely populated than they otherwise would be. Gold and lead^ are 
produced in considerable quantities. 

A third uplift is found in southern Missomi, northern Arkansas 
and eastern Oklahoma, the Ozark Uplift, It is a very ancient region 
geologically and covers an area of about 75,000 square miles. The 
highest peaks, which are only about 2,000 feet in altitude, are found 
in the Iron Mountain region. 

As in the Black Hills, there is some timber in the Ozark Moun- 
tains, and their ancient crystalline rocks contain iron, lead, zinc and 
coal. Because of their mineral wealth, several towns have grown up; 
among them, Joplin and Carthage. 

The plains of which these states form a part extend from Mexico 
northward to Canada. Iowa belongs to the Prairie Plains. The 
levelness of the land throughout most of the region under considera- 
tion is favorable to agriculture, especially to the growing of grain, and 
to the construction of wagon and railroads. It also permits a very 
high percentage of the precipitation to penetrate the soil. 

In west central Nebraska there is an extensive area known as the 
Sand Hills. In many cases the depressions between the sand dunes 
contain lakes or ponds. In some the water is fresh and in others 
brackish. This part of the state is sparsely populated. 

South and west of the Black Hills are the Bad Lands. This 
formation extends across the state line into northwestern Nebraska. 
Generally speaking, they lie between the South Fork of the Cheyenne 
and the Niobrara River. They are composed of unconsolidated 
clays and soft sandstones. Occasional layers of harder material 
stand up as ridges. The region is wonderfully rich in fossil forms of 
mammals, and various educational institutions have here obtained 
valuable collections. 

Hydrography. — Owing to the navigability of the Mississippi and 
the Missouri Rivers, they were, before the days of railroads, of great 
value to these states. In its course of 2,553 miles the Mississippi falls 
but 1,535 feet. According to Darton,^ the average daily discharge 



^Journal of Geography, vol. iii, p. 257. 



440 Geography 

of the river is more than 50,000,000,000 cubic feet. It is navigable 
for boats of very light draft as far as St. Paul, and for larger boats 
to St. Louis. 

The Missouri has a total fall of 12,000 feet, and is consequently 
a much swifter stream than the Mississippi. Trappers and traders 
used it extensively in the early days, however. The Platte, Arkansas, 
the Kansas and the many smaller streams are of little or no value 
from the standpoint of navigation. The Platte is shallow and shifts 
its course. Owing to the slight precipitation, many of the streams 
have little volume except immediately following rains or when the 
snows in the mountains are melting. 

Although irrigation is practiced to some extent in the western 
part of this region, the streams are not as valuable as sources of 
water supply as they would be did they not in so many cases flow in 
trenched valleys. In the past the trails followed the larger valleys 
not only because they were the easiest routes of travel, but also 
because they furnished water for the people and the stock, and be- 
cause the trees which grew in the river bottoms furnished fuel. Rail- 
roads follow the valleys in many cases today. This is in part because 
of ease in road building and in part because settlements had sprung 
up along them, thus creating a demand for transportation facilities. 

Water power has been developed in this region in comparatively 
few places. The Falls of St. Anthony furnish much power used in 
sawing timber and particularly in grinding wheat in Minneapolis. 

At Keokuk, Iowa, are the Des Moines Rapids. At great cost the 
government has constructed a concrete dam nearly a mile in length 
spanning the river at this point. The dam has created deep water 
for a distance of 60 miles up stream, and 300,000 horse-power can 
be developed. 

It is impossible to tell just what this will mean to the manufac- 
turing industries of the central part of the United States. The 
saving in coal will be enormous. St. Louis, although 137 miles south 
of Keokuk, has contracted for 60,000 horse-power for a period of 
99 years. Power will be used in several smaller cities nearer to Keokuk. 
Outside of Minnesota this region has few lakes, although there are 
some in the eastern part of South Dakota and in Iowa. 

Influence of Climate. — Because of the central position of the 
region, its climate is very continental. Owing to the considerable 
range in latitude, the winters are much more severe in the northern 
than in the southern part. Blizzards sweep across the level stretches 
of land, delaying travel and communication and causing loss among 



The West Central States 

f 

a; 

I 



442 Geography 

live stock. As is shown by the map, the precipitation gradually 
decreases from the east to the west. West of the one hundredth 
meridian it is in most sections less than 20 inches annually, and there- 
fore not sufficient for agriculture. The Rocky Mountains deprive 
this semi-arid belt of much moisture. 

Agriculture and Stock Raising. — These are essentially agricultural 
states. The soil is fertile, much of it being glacial till. In some sec- 
tions, as in southeastern Nebraska, there are large areas of loess. 
The area in farms varies from 53 per cent, in South Dakota to 95 
per cent, in Iowa. In only two counties in Iowa, Dickinson and Emmet, 
was the percentage in farms in 1910 less than 90. The percentage of the 
population classed as rural in 1910 varied from 67 in Missouri to 
92 in South Dakota. 

As a result of studies made in the Black Hills, Professor N. H. 
Darton, of the United States Geological Survey, was able to predict 
with remarkable accuracy the depth at which water following the 
dip of the strata eastward from this section would be tapped by wells 
in South Dakota. One well put down by the Burlington Railroad 
has a depth of 2,695 feet and has a flow of about 500,000 gallons 
daily. Many other artesian wells are proving of great value. 

In Minnesota and the Dakotas the most valuable crop is wheat. 
The Red River Valley, which is almost level, is a wonderful wheat 
country. In the other states in the group corn is the leading crop. 
In the chief corn-growing states the hog industry is very important. 
In ail of the states hay is a prominent crop. In southern Kansas 
some cotton is grown and there is considerable fruit. 

In the semi-arid part of the region cattle are raised in large 
numbers. The light snowfall and the nutritious bunch grass are 
favorable conditions. Windmills are of great value on many ranches, 
making it possible to have a plentiful supply of water for the stock. 
Many cattle are shipped into the eastern part of the region to be 
fed on corn for a few weeks before being marketed. 

Forest Resource. — This whole region has only one important 
forest belt, that in Minnesota. As has been stated, there is some 
timber in the Black Hills and in the Ozark Uplift. They supply little 
beyond the purely local demand which is made upon them by the 
mines and the towns in the areas, however. Along the river bottoms 
there is some timber, and many trees have been planted by the farm- 
ers. Although the absence of timber favored agriculture, it was a 
disadvantage so far as the construction of buildings and fences and 
a fuel supply were concerned. Many of the early settlers built sod 



The West Central States 443 

houses, and when raikoad facilities were poor, corn was often used 
as a fuel. 

Mineral Wealth. — Minnesota is exceedingly rich in iron, pro- 
ducing about 75 per cent, of the total output of the United States. 
The iron-producing land is lai^ely in the hands of the state, and the 
money obtained from leasing it is devoted to educational purposes. 
This is making the University of Minnesota one of the greatest in 
our country. 

In the Dakotas there are vast deposits of lignite' which until 
recently were thought to be practically worthless. South Dakota 
has gold and lead. Kansas is one of the leading salt-producing 
states in the Union, Hutchinson being the chief center. By means 
of pipes, witer is carried to the salt, which after it has been dissolved, 
is pumped up as brine. In the Ozark Uplift there are iron, lead, 
zinc and cobalt. Valuable clay deposits are worked in and near 
St. Louis and Kansas City. 

Manufactures. — The states in this group are not important in 
manufacturing, yet manufactiu'ing is steadily increasing. The 
per capita value of the manufactured articles in the several states 
in 1909 was as follows: Minnesota, $197.00; Iowa, $117.00; Missouri, 
$174.00; North Dakota, $33.00; South Dakota, $30.00; Nebraska, 
$167.00; Kansas, $192.00. For the same date the figures for New 
York are $370.00, Pennsylvania $334.00, and Illinois $340.38. The 
percentage of the total population engaged in manufacturing pur- 
suits varied from 4.6 in Missouri to practically 1.0 in South Dakota. 
It will be observed that the states in which there are no large cities 
rank low in manufactming. 

Railroads. — The railroad net is well developed about as far west 
as the one hundredth meridian. The decreased pirecipitation west 
of this has resulted in a sparse population, and therefore there is not 
a great demand for transportation facilities. The region is served 
by several transcontinental Unes with spurs into the sections offering 
the most trade. 

CITIES 

St. Louis is the greatest city in the area, and in 1910 ranked 
fourth among the cities of the United States in manufacturing. The 
selection of the site and the development of the city illustrate the 
importance of geographic conditions. Wishing to establish a trading 
post which would control the Missouri and the Mississippi, the 
Louisiana Fur Company in 1764 sent Pierre Liqueste Laclede to 
select a site. 



444 Geooilxpht 

Before the selection was made Laclede leanied that France had 
ceded to England the land east of the Mississippi. The new post 
was therefore of necessity located on the west side of the river. 
Twenty miles south of the junction of the Miasouri and the Misstssippi 
there are limestone teiTa<es about 2 miles in length. The lowest of 
these is about 20 feet alxive the river and out of the reach of floods. 
A small stream called Mill Creek flowed into the rivw at this point, 
and there were springs alM>. Here the post was established. 



l-K-.. 170— The Olive Street canyon, St. Louiii, 

Until about 1840 the fur trade was the chief activity in St. Ivouia. 
Down both of the great rivers many boatloads of furs were floated 
each year, and the trappers secured supplies from St, Louis. About 
1822 trade with Santa F**- began, and developed rapidly. St. Louis, 
because of its position, profited greatly from this for many years. 
In 1817 the first steamboat reached the city. "The influence of the 
river trade on the growth of St. Louis is suggested by the fact that 
in 1845 there were 2,050 steamboat arrivals in the city. The first 
steamboat to visit St. Louis was the General Pike, in 1817. Prior 
to this it had cost 50 cents a poun<l to pole or row freight from New 



The West Central States 445 

Orleans to St. Louis; twenty years later the freight rate for the same 
trip was 2 cents a pound. "^ 

Today St. Louis profits by the fact that the minimum depth of 
the river below the city is 9 feet, while above it is from 3 to 5 feet. 
St. Louis therefore became a point of reshipment. Much lumber 
is received from the north by water and some coal from the east by 
way of the Ohio and Mississippi. At this point there are several 
bridges over the river, connecting the city with East St. Louis. One 
of these, a municipal bridge costing about $5,000,000, was opened 
to traffic on January 19, 1917. In yet another way the Mississippi 
is of value to the city. It furnishes a water supply which is rendered 
clear and soft by a process of filtration. 

St. Louis has become one of our greatest railroad centers. The 
bridging of the river is one of the several causes of this. There are 
coal, iron, lead and zinc in the Ozarks, and hardwood, which the Ohio 
and the Mississippi make available. The second point has led to the 
manufacture of furniture, cars and wooden ware. 

Being in the hog and corn belt, having an abundant water supply 
and excellent facilities for shipment, St. Louis has become one of 
our greatest slaughtering and meat-packing centers. This is by far 
the most important industry in the city. Great numbers of hides 
being at hand and tanbark obtainable by water, boots and shoes are 
manufactured extensively. This was the second industry in impor- 
tance in 1909. 

The manufacture of tobacco ranks third in value. Again a 
geographic condition is responsible, for the Ohio and Mississippi 
afford cheap shipment for the raw products. There are large deposits 
of clay close at hand, and this has led;,to the manufacture of bricks, 
tile and sewer pipe. The limestone whiph underlies the city and 
vicinity is quarried and used in the manufacture of Portland cement. 
Other important manufactures are machinery, general hardware, 
drugs, chemicals, soap and baking powder. 

St. Louis is the chief city in the metropolitan district, which 
includes East St. Louis and several smaller places in Illinois. These 
towns now carry on considerable manufacturing as a result of the 
completion of the Eads Bridge in 1874. Previous to this date ferry- 
boats carried both passengers and freight across the river, as there 
was no bridge. This was a slow process, and at times during the 
winter floating ice temporarily tied up traffic. 

'Fenneman, N. M.: "Physiography of the St. Louis Area," p. 70. 



446 Gbogr^ht 

Ksnsas Ci^i Missouri, is located where formerly there was a 
-French fur-trading settlement. Until 1S66, when a raikoad first 
served the region, Kansas City was important in the caravan trade 
carried on over the Santa F^ trail. 



The city is located at the confluence of the Kansas and the Mis- 
souri Rivers and at a point where the Missouri makes a great bend 
to the northward. In early days much westward travel followed the 
Missouri to this bend and there left the river. Naturally & town of 
importance developed there. 

There are three levels upon which the city is built, the lowest 



The West Central States 447 

being devoted to the railroads and stockyards, to manufacturing and 
the wholesale trade, the middle to the retail business, and the highest 
to residential purposes. 

The great agricultural wealth of the area tributary to Kansas 
City and the extensive development of stock raising have resulted 
in making the city an important railroad center and a grain and stock 
market. The city has instituted a line of freight boats upon the river, 
and the government has made some appropriations for improving 
navigation. Meat packing is an important industry. There are 
flour and grist mills, and much limiber is handled. In 1920 the popu- 
lation was about 324,000. 

Topeka, the capital of Kansas, is located in a fertile prairie region 
on both banks of the Kansas River about 65 miles west of Kansas 
City. In addition to agricultural interests, the tributary country 
supports coal mining and stone quarrying. The city has large rail- 
road shops, and foundries, flour mills and ice plants. The population 
in 1920 was about 50,000. 

Omaha. — The map shows that practically all of the population 
of Nebraska is in the eastern half of the state. There is no city having 
a population of 10,000 west of the hundredth meridian. In 1920 
Omaha, the largest city, had approximately 191,000 inhabitants. 
Its chief industry is the smelting and refining of lead. It is quite an 
important railroad center. South Omaha, which is practically a part 
of the larger city, is the leading manufacturing center of the state. 
Its interests are almost entirely connected with the slaughtering and 
meat-packing industries. 

Iowa has no city of 100,000 inhabitants. Des Moines, the capital 
and largest city, has a central situation on the river of the same name. 
It manufactures foundry and machine-shop products and packs 
meat. Both Sioux City and Cedar Rapids excel the capital in the 
value of their manufactured products. Meat packing is the leading 
industry in Sioux City. 

In the Dakotas, as in Kansas and Nebraska, the larger cities are in 
the eastern halves of the states. Sioux Falls, on the falls of the Big 
Sioux River, and Aberdeen, Huron and Mitchell, all in the fertile 
James valley, are the largest cities in South Dakota. 

The two largest cities in North Dakota, Fargo and Grand Forks, 
are in the remarkably productive Red River valley. Fargo is quite 
a railroad center, and much wheat is shipped to Duluth, Minneapolis 
and other points. It manufactures saddlery and harness for the 
ranchers in the tributary country. Grand Forks manufactures flour. 



448 Geography 

St PauL — The most northerly of the many important cities on 
the Mississippi River are St. Paul and Minneapolis. The Falls of 
St. Anthony are caused by a ledge of resistant limestone, a few miles 
north of the junction of the Minnesota and the Mississippi. At the 
head of navigation a trading post naturally developed. To this post 
great quantities of furs were brought. The fur-trading center has 
developed into the magnificent city of St, Paul. 



As a result of its early prominence St. Paul is yet one of our 
chief fur centers, and fur goods are among the important manufac- 
tures. When settlers were pouring into Minnesota and the Dakotas 
to eng^e in wheat growing, great numbers went as far as St, Paul 
by water. The city is an important center of distribution and one 
of our great railroad centers. 

The foundry and njachine-shop products are more valuable than 
any other of her manufactures. The making of boots and shoes 
is another important industry. 

Miiuieiy)olJs is the larger of the Twin Cities, and is the chief 
industrial center in the state. It has the great advantage of cheap 



F THE WEST CEBTRAL STATES 



The West Central States 449 

power obtained from the Falls of St. Anthony and from Taylor's 
Falls in the St. Croix River. This is utilized in sawing lumber obtained 
in the nearby forests and in grinding the wheat produced in the 
tributary country. 

The city began as a lumber Center, and lumber and the commodi- 
ties derived from this source are today among her most valuable 
products, Minneapolis is the chief flour milling center in the United 
States. Wheat from the Red River valley and from other parts in 



Fio. 173.— A eceae in Duluth. 

the Northwest pour by rail into the city. Here are located more than 
20 great flour mills, and many elevators in which wheat is stored. 
Linseed oil is manufactured in large quantitiet, for Minnesota is one 
of our chief flax-producing states. There are many foundries, 
machine shops and railroad repair shops. It is interesting to note 
the influence of the course of the river upon the growth of these 
cities. Because of this, Minneapolis has her greatest extent from 
north to south and St. Paul from east to west. 
- Duluth. — At the head of the greatest inland water route in the 
world stands Duluth, Here systems of transportation change. From 
the forests of Minnesota come trainloads of lumber to be placed 



450 Geography 

upon ships and carried to the lake ports farther south and east The 
Mesaba Range supplies great quantities of iron ore which are shipped 
to the iron and steel centers — Chicago, Gary, Cleveland, Buffalo, 
and even Pittsburgh. Each autumn the railroads rush wheat from 
Minnesota and the Dakotas to Duluth to be shipped eastward before 
the season of navigation closes. The chief item of freight which the 
lake steamers carry back to Duluth is coal, for the northern part 
of the Mississippi valley has little of this very important com- 
modity. Duluth distributes coal over a large area, including a part 
of central Canada. 

Duluth has had a rapid growth. Like St. Louis and St. Paul, its 
first interest was in the fur trade. Not until 1870 did a railroad 
reach the place, yet today there are many lines. The city is situated 
on the north shore of St. Louis Bay, and directly across the bay — that 
is, to the southeast — is Superior. Minnesota Point, a long narrow 
bar of sand, extends from the northern shore southeastward for about 
7 miles, and Wisconsin Point projects from the southern shore north- 
westward for about one-half this distance. These peninsulas nearly 
enclose the bay, which is thus well protected. In order to avoid sailing 
around the end of Minnesota Point in entering or leaving the 
city, a ship canal was cut across the base of the poiut. This has 
promoted growth. 

The city has a beautiful situation. For about 30 miles it stretches 
along the shore of the bay, being built upon hillsides that overlook 
the water. The harbor affords anchorage to the largest lake vessels. 
The cost of shipping a bushel of wheat from Diiluth to Buffalo by 
water is approximately one-fourth as great as the cost of shipping 
a bushel of wheat between the two points by rail. Thus cheap trans- 
portation is one of the great advantages poss-^essed by Duluth. 

The city has industrial as well as commercial advantages. The 
St. Louis River, which enters the bayifrom the southwest, has been 
utilized in the development of power. By means of a canal, water 
has been led from a reservoir fed by a series of rapids, across uplands 
to a point where a head of 375 feet is obtained. A large amount of 
power has been developed, and is used in both Duluth and Superior. 

STUDIES 

To what extent does the topography of these states guide road building 
and the distribution of population? Why is the Missouri more subject to flood 
than is the Mississippi? What commodities are shipped by river? Why is 
a part of the area subject to tornadoes? Why is much of the section well adapted 



The West Central States 451 

to fruit growing? Why can the iron of Minnesota be so advantageously handled? 
What advantages has St. Louis for manufacturing; for commerce? Why is 
Duluth important as a coal distributor? 

REFERENCES 

Chandler, Harlet P.: "Harnessing the Father of Waters." J(mr, of Geog.f 

vol. xi, p. 184. 
CoNDRA, G. E.: "Geographic Influences in the Development of Nebraska." 

Jour, of Geog.f vol. ix, p. 85. 
Engeln, O. D.: "In Missouri." Jour, of Geog., vol. x, p. 263. 
HoTCHKiss, Caroline W.: "The Great Plains in Their Relation to Human 

Occupation and Development." Jour. ofGeog., vol. ix, p. 225. 
Miller, George J.: "Agriculture in Minnesota.' ' Jour. ofGeog., vol. xiv,p. 196. 
"Minnesota. Physical Geography, Climate, Resources, Industries, Cities." 

Jour, of Geog.j vol. xiv, pp. 161-244. 
Sutherland, W. J.: "The Earth Products of Kansas." Jour, of Geog. vol. 

xiii, p. 274. 
Van Cleep, Eugene: "Duluth, a Product of the Waterways." Jour, of Geog., 

vol. XV, p. 189. 



CHAPTER XLV 
The Rocky Mountain and Great Basin Provinces. 

General Statement. — It is exceedingly interesting to examine a 
geography, such as Morse's, edition of 1807, and find that not a state 
in the vast area included under this chapter heading is mentioned. 
They are not mentioned because at that time they did not exist. 
There was no territorial organization previous to 1861, and Nevada, 
the first territory to become a state, was admitted in 1864. 

In 1805 Captains Lewis and Clark explored parts of Montana 
and northern Idaho while in their memorable trip. They left St. 
Louis in May, 1804, and returned in September, 1806. Practically 
nothing was known concerning the great Northwest previous to 
their expedition. 

The Rocky Mountain States have today many thriving cities 
with every modem convenience. They have several transcontinental 
lines of railroads. They have good educational facilities. Consider- 
ing the vast extent of territory, the population is very small, however. 
The area of these states amounts to 28 per cent, of the total area of 
the United States, but their population was in 1920 only about 4 per 
cent, of that of the United States. During the decade ending in 1920 
the population of the group increased 21 per cent. The lack of 
cheap agricultural land east of the Rocky Mountains, the develop- 
ment of irrigation in the Rocky Mountain province, the vast mineral 
resource and the extension of roads are the chief causes for the greater 
increase in this province than in the United States as a whole. 

Influence of Topography. — This area is very mountainous. The 
numerous ranges of the Rocky Mountain System, the Wasatch Moun- 
tains, the Uintas, the Basin ranges and other less important eleva- 
tions diversify the surface. Between the Rocky Mountains on the 
east and the Sierra Nevada and Cascade Mountains on the west are 
vast plateaus, the averge elevation of which is from 4,000 to 8,000 feet. 

Before the days of railroads the mountains were a formidable 
barrier to travel and settlement, and today they cause the construc- 
tion of roads to be costly and necessitate a large charge for trans- 
portation. The early western trails followed the valleys and sought 
out the lowest passes, and the railroads in a general way follow these 
routes. The valleys of the Missouri, Yellowstone, Platte, Arkansas, 
Rio Grande, Grand, Gunnison, Snake, Humboldt and other streams 
452 



«RI T /coluiIb, a\ ALB E 




MOUNTAIN 
STATES 

SCALE OF MILES 
60 iJo 150 200 

L.L. POATEgCO., W.Y. 



Longitude 



MAP OF BOCKY MOUNTAIN AND PLATEAU STATES 



Rocky Mountain and Great Basin Provinces 453 

are occupied by lines of railroad. The Colorado is an importatit 
exceptioD. No railroad parallels the river and none crosses it north 
of the Needles, where the Santa Ffi effects a crossing. 

From the standpoint of scenery, the topography exerts a marked 
influence upon human conditions in the region, ('olorado is a national 
playground. The Garden of the Gods and the many natural parks, 
with their trees, streams, lakes and desirable summer climate, are 
attracting large numbers of persons every summer. The Grand 



Fio. 174.— The Garden □{ the Godn. ColoruJo. 

Canyon of the Colorado is one of the wonders of the world. Here, 
as the vast plateau has slowly been elevated, the river has cut down 
through the practically horizontal strata producing a canyon which 
is in places more than a mile in depth. So great an attraction is this 
that the Santa F^ has built a branch line from Williams, Arizona, 
to the rim of the canyon. 

Yellowstone National Park, largely in the northwestern comer 
of Wyoming, is especially noted for its many geysers and hot springs. 
Thousands of people visit this wonderland every summer. 

Glacier National Park, in the northern part of Montana, is just 
becoming known. It has many glaciers, lakes, streams, forests 
and mountains. 



454 Geography 

Hydrography. — ^The rivers have steep gradients and therefore 
flow swiftly. In most cases they have eroded deep canyons. Prac- 
tically speaking, there are no navigable streams within the area, 
although the lower Colorado is used for a short distance. 

Many of the streams furnish water for irrigation, but others flow 
in such deep canyons that they are of no value from this point of 
view. Much power can be developed from the rivers, and consider- 
able development has already taken place. 

There is but one large body of water in the province — Great Salt 
Lake. This lake has had an interesting geological history. At one 
time it had an area about ten times that of the present. Its waters 
were then fresh and it had an outlet to the Snake River through 
Red Rock Pass. Owing to a decrease in precipitation and increase in 
evaporation, probably resulting from the elevation of the Sierra 
Nevada, the volume decreased until there was no outlet, and so the 
waters in time became salty. 

Owing to seasonal changes in temperature and in rate of evapora- 
tion, the lake level oscillates semi-annually. The average annual 
range amounts to about 16 inches. There are also changes in level 
due to variations in the annual precipitation. For example, the lake 
level in 1914 was 6 feet above the level of 1905. 

The density of the water is now so great, there being about 20 per 
cent, of salt, that a human being can not sink in it. On the shore 
there are several resorts, chief of which is Saltaire. Large quantities 
of salt are produced by evaporating the lake water. 

South of Great Salt Lake, and connected with it by the Jordan 
River, is Utah Lake. This body of water is fresh and has an area 
of 130 square miles. The lake was caused by a flow of lava that for 
a time dammed the Jordan River. 

At high altitudes there are numerous glacial lakes, especially in 
the northern part of the area. Some of these are beginning to attract 
summer visitors because of their scenery and their fishing. 

Influence of Climate. — Except in the extreme southern part the 
climate, owing to the influence of both latitude and altitude, is quite 
cold during the winter. Upon the mountains there is heavy snowfall, 
but it is light upon the plateaus. Blizzards occasionally obstruct 
travel and communicati9n and cause loss to stock on the range . 

In the south latitude and distance from the sea combine to produce 
high summer temperatures, and very moderate winter conditions exist 
upon the lowlands. In the basin of the Gila River oranges, dates 
and cotton are grown. In fact cotton is grown in southwestern Utah. 



Rocky Mountain and Great Basin Provinces 456 

Except upon the mountains, rainfall is very light in the plateau 
section. This is because the western mountains cause precipitation 
upon their western slopes, thus depriving the plateau of moisture. 
The Great Basin, which comprises nearly all of Nevada, western 
Utah and a considerable area in eastern California, sends no stream 
to the sea. 

The precipitation map makes it clear that desert conditions pre- 
vail in considerable areas. Knowledge of the region has caused a 
great shrinkage in the supposed area of the Great American Desert. 
Directly west of Great Salt Lake is an area about 100 x 40 miles in 
its dimensions which yet bears this name. This is a true desert. 

Agriculture. — ^The tilling of the soil is greatly restricted by both 
surface conditions and lack of precipitation. There are sections 
where the soil contains so much alkali that few plants would grow 
in it, but for the most part all that is needed is water. Because of 
light precipitation, the soils have not been leached as they have in 
more humid regions. Although agriculture is not carried on upon 
an extensive scale, the development of irrigation is each year bring- 
ing larger areas under cultivation. 

TABLE 56. 

Per Cent, of Akea op Rocky Mountain Province in Farms in 1909. 

Arizona 2 

New Mexico 14 

Utah 6 

Colorado . . , 20 

Nevada 4 

Idaho 10 

Wyoming ' 13 

Montana 14 

In Colorado, Utah and Idaho sugar beets are grown in large 
quantities, and beet sugar is manufactured. Where there is sufficient 
water, alfalfa is an important crop. The region to the north of Den- 
ver is a great potato country, while in the vicinity of Grand Junction 
peafehes, apples and cherries are successfully grown. Much fruit 
is grown in Utah valley, and there are canning establishments there. 

A large number of the government reclamation projects are found 
in these states. Among them is the great Salt River Project, which 
serves an area of 210,000 acres, of which Phoenix is the center. In 



456 Geography 

south-central New Mexico is the Rio Grande Project, which derives 
water from the Rio Grande. Nevada has the Truckee-Carson Proj- 
ect, Utah the Strawberry Valley Project, and in Colorado is the 
famous Uncompahgre Valley Project. In Idaho is the Boise Project, 
in Wyoming the Shoshone Project, and in Montana the Milk River, 
Blackfeet, Sun River and other projects. 

Stock raising is one of the leading industries in these states. 
The high price of land east of the Rocky Mountains has steadily 
phifted the cattle ranges westward. In the more arid sections, 
stock does not always have sufficient water and pasturage and in 
the north eome loss is caused by blizzards. The Chinook winds 
are a help to stockmen in the Northwest because these winds, being 
dry and warm, cause the snow to evaporate rapidly. Partly on this 
account stock can secure considerable food on the range during the 
winter months. 

As sheep can find pasturage where cattle can not, these states 
are well adapted to sheep raising. In 1919 Wyoming led all the 
states in the Union in the number of sheep, while Idaho ranked 
second. Each state in the Rocky Mountain group had more than 
1,000,000 sheep. 

Vegetation. — Forests exist upon the mountains and the most 
lofty plateaus, but owing to the roughness of the country and the 
great distance from markets there is little^ lumbering. On the desert 
areas the vegetation is of such kinds as have become adapted to the 
scanty rainfall — the cactus is an example. Except in himiid moun- 
tain valleys there ig no sod. 

Influence of Mineral Wealth. — The fur industry first attracted 
white men to this region, but later mineral wealth was the chief object. 
Gold, silver, copper and lead are produced in large quantities. Some 
coal is mined, and there are valuable deposits of iron not yet worked. 
Salt is produced in Utah. A large number of towns and cities owe 
their origin and their growth to mineral wealth. Cripple Creek, 
Leadville, Georgetown, Creede, Telluride and Silverton are among 
the Cyolorado towns. Denver owes its prosperity in large measure 
to the mining industry. Bisbee, Arizona, is a great copper center. 
Helena and Butte, Montana, are mining centers, and many others 
might be named. 

Transportation. — In spite of the difficulties connected with the 
building of roads several transcontinental lines cross these states. 
The Santa F6 crosses southeastern Colorado, following the Arkansas 
for some distance. It strikes the Rio Grande a little southeast of 



Rocky Mountain and Great Basin Provinces 457 

the ancieut city of Santa F6. It follows the valley for a short distance 
and then pursues a nearly westerly course to Los Angeles. From El 
Paso the Southern Pacific extends across southern New Mexico and 
Arizona, crossing the Colorado River at Yuma. 

The San Pedro, Los Angeles and Salt Lake connects Los Angeles 
with Salt Lake City. Here connections are made with the Denvei 
and Rio Grande. The Union Pacific crosses southern Wyoming, 
taking advantage of the low plateau in the southeastern part of that 
state. The Northern Pacific, the Great Northern and Chicago, 
Milwaukee and St. Paul cross Montana and Idaho. Many branch 
lines serve the various sections of this province. 

CITIES 

Denver. — ^At the junction of Cherry Creek and the South Platte 
River some cabins were built in 1858. Here cottonwood trees 
afforded shade and firewood and the streams furnished water for 
domestic purposes and later for irrigation. At this point is located 
the largest of the Rocky Mountain cities — Denver. 

The growth and prosperity of Denver are largely due to the 
great mineral wealth of Colorado. As mining increased in impor- 
tance Denver more and .more came to he the center from which 
supplies were obtained and to which ores were sent to be smelted. 
The first railroad reached the city in 1870, and Denver is now the 
chief railroad center of the Rocky Mountain region. 

Coal is necessary for smelting, and Denver is so situated as to be 
able to obtain coal cheaply. As a result, lead and copper are shipped 
here to be smelted. The coal is one of the factors leading to the 
manufacture of mining machinery and tools, which are supplied to 
the mining centers in various parts of Colorado and in other states. 
Water power also aids in manufacturing. 

To the north of Denver is a productive agricultural area in which 
the waters of the South Platte are used for irrigation. Potatoes and 
vegetables are grown in large quantities. In the city are mills where 
wheat is ground. Thus Denver furnishes the mining centers with 
food and also with meat which is packed in the city. Because of the 
importance of the industry of stock raising in Colorado, Denver 
manufactures butter, cheese and condensed milk. 

No other large city in our country has so lofty a situation as 
Denver, being just about one mile above sea level. The atmosphere 
is remarkably clear and dry and the air is pure and invigorating. 
Pike's Peak, nearly 100 miles distant, may be seen on clear days. 



4S8 Oeoorapht 

The percentage of sunshine is very high and the mean aimual pre- 
cipitation is about 15 inches. These conditions, tt^ther with the 
wonderful scenery near at hand, have caused Denver to become a, 
great health and pleasure resort. 

Salt Lake Ci^. — In July, 1847, a settlement was established 
where Salt Lake City now stands. It is In the midst of a wilderness 



Fia. I7ft.— Denver, Cdo. (Courteay Denver Touriit sad Publioity Burnu. ! 

hundreds of milee in extent. To the eastward the nearest town was 
Council Bluffs, about 1,000 miles distant. Salt Lake City is today far 
removed from large centers of population. It is 920 miles from San 
Francisco, 786 from Los Angeles, and 745 milea from Denver. It 
therefore draws upon and supplies a very large area. 

The city is situated about 10 miles from the shore of Great Salt 
Lake. To the east of the city rise the snow-capped peaks of the 
Wasatch Mountaim. From their canyons water is obtained fcff 
domestic use and for irrigation, and electrical energy for manufac- 
turing, transportation and light. There are mineral deposits of great 



EoCKY Mountain and Gbeat Basin Provinces 459 

value tributary to the city, and building atones and clays are found 
in abundance. 

As a result of the existence of much copper close at band, and 
because coal is obtainable at low cost, much smelting is done near 
Salt Lake City. ■ There are foundries and plants for the manufac- 
ture of iron and steel goods. Railroad shops are located here, and 
these furnish employment to many men. Among other important 
manufactures are cotton goods, shoes and canned fruit. 



Fio. 176.— Buainese aecHoD ol Snlt Lake City. 

One of the features of the city is the broad streets, usually 100 
feet in width, with 16-foot sidewalks. The many trees add to the 
beauty of the city. The Tabernacle and the Temple are noted 
buildings, the latter being constructed of local granite. 

The mineral wealth, the increase in manufactures, the growing 
importance of agriculture and the fame of Salt Lake City as a tourist 
resort have caused it to become quite a railroad center. The Union 
Pacific and the Western Pacific connect it with San Francisco. The 
Oregon Short Line leads to Portland and the Puget Sound country. 
By means of the San Pedro, Los Angeles and Salt Lake, Los Angeles 
and SaJt Lake are brought within 24 hours of one another. The 
Denver and Rio Grande and the Union Pacific make connections 
with the eastern part of the United States. 



460 Geography 

STUDIES 

By means of a map trace the railroads which cross the province. Show the 
relation of topography to these lines. Locate the passes which are used. What 
proof that the Colorado River had established its course before the uplift 
spoken of occurred? What indication that Yellowstone National Park is young 
geologically? In what way are the rivers in this province most important? 
What part of Utah is best watered? Why? What conditions caused Denver 
to become an important distributing center? 

REFERENCES 

Atwood, Wallace W.: '*A Geographic Study of the Mesa Verde." Annals 
Association of Am, GeographerSj vol. i, p. 95. 

Campbell, Marius R.: "The Glacier National Park." 

Davis, W. M.: "The Front Range, Colorado." Annals Association of Am. 
Geographers J vol. i, p. 21. 

Jefferson, Mark: "Utah, the Oasis at the Foot of the Wasatch." The Geo- 
graphical RevieWf vol. i, p. 346. 

Powell, J. W.: In the "Physiography of the United States," pp. 87-95. 

Russell, I. C: "North America." pp. 120-146. 

"The Northern Pacific Route." U. S. Geological Survey Bull. 611, 1915. 

"The Overland Route." U. S. Geological Survey BuU. 612, 1915. 

"The Santa F^ Route." U. S. Geological Survey Bull 613, 1915. 

The above bulletins, $1.00 each, kre invaluable aids in interpreting the 

geography of the western part of the United States. 







40^ 



San F|raiici8c^S5^jSJ 



Son 
Santa Cruz'^**? '***^ 
Monterey p^\U l*™* 

TOia 



San Luis Obisp* 



PACIFIC STATES 

SCALE OF MrtES 
i So 100 l3o 800 

L.L. WaATEBCO., M.Y.~ 



Lonijfitude 



West 



Greenwich 



MAP OP PACIFIC COAST STATES 



CHAPTER XLVI 

The Pacific Coast States 

* 

Position. — As applied to the geography of the Pacific Coast 
States," position is an important factor. Our civilization has spread 
westward, and hence the position of these states with respect to the 
eastern part of the country is one of extreme isolation. Before the 
days of the railroads the overland journey from the Atlantic sea- 
board to the Pacific coast required several months and was fraught 
with hardships and dangers. The journey around Cape Horn, or 
even across the Isthmus of Panama, was long and dangerous. 

Because of this isolation, the first settlers in these states came by 
sea, and the isolation and resulting ignorance concerning the country 
long delayed overland settlement. . The position has a favorable 
aspect, however. It enables the Pacific Coast States to greatly profit 
by the rapidly increasing Oriental commerce. The opening of the 
Panama Canal shortens the distance between New York and San 
Francisco by approximately 8,000 miles. This is of great commercial 
importance, and will result in a rapid increase in the population due 
to inmiigration. 

Coast Line. — The Pacific Coast States have few good natural 
harbors. This is in part due to an elevation of the continental shelf. 
Puget Sound, San Francisco Bay and San Diego are striking excep- 
tions to this and are the result of subsidence, which was general from 
Puget Sound northward, but local south of Puget Sound. There are 
a number of bays having a small back country and consequently 
large cities have not developed upon them. At San Pedro, the port 
of Los Angeles, the United States government has spent several 
million dollars for the improvement of the harbor. San Diego has 
a good harbor which will be of greater importance when railroad 
connections with the interior have been improved. 

Influence of Topography. — Roughly speaking, California consists 
of a great interior valley and a mountainous rim. In the interior 
valley and upon the coastal plain, therefore, most of the population 
is found. For several hundred miles the Sierra Nevadas rise like a 
mighty wall close to the eastern boundary of California. The moun- 
tains are largely composed of granite rocks. These, ages ago, were 
forcied in a molten state into older rocks. As a result of changes 
slates and schists were formed. A long period of erosion was followed 

461 



462 Geography 

by extensive lava flows. Later the system was tilted, producing a 
steep eastward slope and a gentle western slope. During recent times 
both water and ice have been fashioning many wonderful scenic 
features. Majestic Mt. Shasta, 14,380 feet in altitude, is a volcanic 
mountain from which much lava has flowed. "During one of the 
later eruptions of Shasta a stream of lava (andesite) poured down 
its southern slope, entered the channel of the Sacramento, and fol- 
lowed that stream for 50 milee." * 
• On May 30, 1914, Lassen Peak, after a period of quiescence of 
unknown duration, became active. So frequent and so violent were 
its eruptions that some of the settlers were much alarmed. Up to 
January 1, 1917, about 200 outbreaks had occurred. Since that 
time the eruptions have been much less frequent. Fragmental 
material, steam, gases and mud have been ejected in large amounts, 
but up to date only a relatively small amount of lava has issued from 
the mountain. 

The Cascade Mountains extend northward from Shasta to the 
southern part of British Columbia. Like the Sierra Nevada, they 
are lofty and contain numerous volcanic peaks, among which are 
Hood and Rainier. Lava is more extensive in the southern than in 
the northern part. 

The mountains of the Coast Range extend from Mexico to Alaska. 
Within the province under consideration they are nowhere very high. 
They are recent in origin, and are in large part composed of sand- 
stones and other sedimentary rocks. Locally there is much lava 
of still more recent date. 

Between the Coast Range on the west and the Sierra Nevada 
on the east is the Central valley of California, about 400 miles long 
and from 40 to 50 miles wide. Into this valley the waste of the moun- 
tains has been going for centuries, building up the vast area of level 
and fertile land. Wells have been sunk to a depth of 3,000 feet 
without reaching bedrock. 

The depression between the Coast Range and the Cascade 
Mountains is not so well defined. It consists of three parts: The 
Puget Sound valley, largely occupied by water, the Cowlitz valley 
and the Willamette valley. 

The westerly winds, coming in contact with the mountains, 
cause abundant precipitation upon their western slopes. As one 
result, there are extensive forests upon the west slopes. As another 

» U. S. Geological Survey Bull. 614, p. 63. 



The Pacific Coast States 463 

result the eastern parts of all three states are deficient in rainfall, 
true desert conditions existing in southeastern California. 

The topography has guided wagon and railroad construction, as 
it did the trails of early days. The passes are for the most part 
lofty, hence they have played an important part in determining 
routes of travel. 

In 1805 the Columbia guided the canoes of Lewis and Clark from 
the western slope of the Rocky Moijntains to the mouth of the 
Columbia. Later the Oregon Trail led northward from the Bear 
River in Utah to the Snake and thence to the Columbia. Today a 
railroad follows each bank of the river, as the valley offers the best 
route across the mountains. The Willamette and the Sacramento 
definitely guide the Shasta route. 

The Truckee Pass, 7,012 feet in altitude, and nearly east of San 
Francisco, from the earliest days of migration from the eastward 
has been the land gateway to central California. Through this pass 
the Union Pacific Railroad was built in 1869. The pass naturally 
directs trade and travel by way of the Sacramento Valley to San 
Francisco Bay on the west, and along the valley of the Humboldt 
on the east. The trail which followed this route was known as the 
California Trail. 

In the southern part of California the passes are lower, and as 
a result that part was settled, by people coming overland, earlier than 
were the central and northern parts. The Gila River led trappers 
across Arizona and into southern CaUfornia as early as 1827. The 
Southern Pacific Railroad follows this trail for a considerable dis- 
tance, passing through the San Goi^onio Pass in southeastern Cal- 
ifornia, between San Gorgonio and San Jacinto peaks. 

The Cajon Pass, altitude 4,660 feet, led those who entered Cali- 
fornia over either the Santa F6 or the Spanish Trails, across the 
mountains into the San Bernardino valley. Today this pass is 
shared by the Santa F6 and the Salt Lake railroads. 

East of the Sacramento River the Feather River, a tributary 
of the Sacramento, has carved a beautiful canyon on the western 
slope of the mountains. This leads to Beckwith Pass, the altitude 
of which is about 5,280 feet. The precipices and canyon walls made 
this route impassable by wagons, but the Western Pacific Railroad 
has recently opened its line through this canyon, thus connecting 
the Bay Section with Salt Lake City. 

Through its wonderful scenic features the topography of the 
Pacific Coast States is exercising a strong influence upon the develop- 



464 Geography 

ment of the area. The Yosemite Valley is one of the wonders of 
the world. Lake Tahoe, Mt. Shasta, Crater Lake, Lake Chelan, 
■ Mt. Rainier and other features are yearly attracting a larger 
number of persons. This leads to the establishment of resorts, the 
building and improvement of roads, the bringing in of capital and 
the growth of population. . 

Hydrography. — Although much of the Pacific Slope is well 
watered, it has few rivers wjiich are valuable from the standpoint 
of navigation. This is because most of the streams are short and 
swift. They are of great importance in other ways, however. 

The Colimibia is the one great waterway in the province. Its 
basin has an area of more than 250,000 square miles, and the river 
and its tributaries afford 2,000 miles of navigable waters. Ages ago 
the Columbia in its lower course flowed in a broad, flat valley, 
eroded from the basaltic rock of the region. Then an elevation oc- 
curred, and as a result of rejuvenation the river cut its channel deeper, 
and fashioned flat-topped hills out of parts of its old valley floor. 
At a later time subsidence took place, and the ocean invaded the 
land, drowning the Coliunbia for a distance of 140 miles from its 
mouth. This drowning produced a deep channel up and down which, 
centuries later, great ships were to ply bearing their valuable cargoes. 
There are 35 feet of water to Vancouver, and ocean-going vessels 
reach Portland, a few miles south of the junction of the Willamette 
and the Columbia. 

From the standpoint of manufacturing, the river and its tribu- 
taries will be of inestimable value in time to come. '^The system 
as a whole is capable of furnishihg an estimated maximmn of about 
19,740,000 horse-power, of which only 351,249 horge-power, less than 
2 per cent., was developed in 1909, the latest year for which complete 
statistics are available.'* ^ 

Mineral Wealth. — It was gold which led to the settlement of 
California by people from other parts of the United States. Although 
gold had been obtained from some of the streams in southern Cali- 
fornia previous to 1848, it had attracted no attention outside of the 
region. The news of James Marshall's discovery spread as rapidly 
as the means of communication permitted, and as a result the white 
population increased from 12,000 in 1848 to 92,000 in 1850. As a 
result of this rapid growth of population California was admitted as 
a state in 1850. 

2 U. S. Geological Survey Bull. 614, p. 26. 



The Pacific Coast States 465 

The output increaaed from $245,301 in 1848 to $81,294,700 
in 1852, in which year the maximum output was reached. The 
total yield from 1848 to 1919, inclusive, has been about $1,617,- 
000,009. Because of the discovery of gold and the large influx 
of people, camps and towns were estabUi^hed in all parts of the 
gold-producing area. Some of the towns became permanent feat- 
ures, but many others soon passed out of existence. Another re- 



sult of the great output of gold was to hasten the building of the 
first transcontinental railroad, the Union Pacific. This was completed 
in 1869, and at once brought the East and the West into closer rela- 
tionship. The time required to make the journey from coast to 
coast was reduced from several months to two weeks. 

Although gold will for many years be one of the important prod- 
ucts of California, it no longer ranks first among the minerals. 
In 1907 petroleum took the leading place, which it yet holds, and 



for years California ranked first in quantity although not in value 
of output. In 1915 Oklahoma took first place both in yield and in 
value. California produces about one-third of our total output of 



bIB River log raft, callec 
Portlsad Chnmber of C 



"cigar raft." (CourMey 



petroleum, the value of which is about one-fifth the value of the 

Output for the United States, 

Manufacturing, so long retarded in California because of lack 
of coal, has received a marked impetus on account of the use of 



The Pacific Coast States 467 

petroleum. It is used on locomotives in all parts of the state and 
in much adjoining territory and on steamships. Much oil is used 
on streets and roads as well. 

Silver, copper, borax, salt, mercury, clay and building stones are 
other forms of mineral wealth possessed by California. This is the 
only state yielding mercury in commercial quantities. 

Of the Pacific Coast States, Washington is the only one in which 
coal mining is important. There are coal mines within 10 miles of 
Puget Sound and yet most of the steamers on the Sound use petro- 
leum, and its use on the railroads is increasing. Where oil is employed, 
less labor is needed, traveling is more cleanly and, in the case of the 
railroads, forests are protected because of absence of sparks. 

Forest Resource. — As has been stated, the abundant precipita- 
tion upon the western slopes of the mountain? and the mild tempera- 
ture favor the growth of dense forests. About one-third of the 
standing timber in the United States is in this area. Twenty-four 
per cent, of the total area of California is classed as forest. In 
many cases a single tree on the Pacific Slope yields thousands of 
feet of Imnber. 

From Bellingham, Everett, Seattle, Tacoma and other Puget 
Sound ports large quantities of lumber are shipped. Logs are 
floated down the Columbia and the Willamette, and Portland exports 
a great deal of lumber. Eureka and Areata, on Huftiboldt Bay, and 
San Francisco are lumber-shipping centers. Lumber is shipped ^rom 
the Pacific Coast States to the Orient, South America, Europe and 
our Atlantic seaboard. 

In California the streams in the forest area, owing to their torren- 
tial character, cannot be utilized for the movement of logs as they 
are in the New England and Lake States. As a result, flumes are 
constructed in which stre^-ms of water carry lumber from the moun- 
tains to the valleys. Lumber is flumed 40 miles to Red Bluff and 57 
miles to Madera, and there are many flumes of considerable length. 

Aside from the demand made by building, much lumber is used 
in the Pacific Coast States for supports in mines, in the manufac- 
ture of various kinds of boxes and beehives and in the making 
of matches. At Chico, California, the Diamond Match Company has 
an immense plant. 

Climate. — In these states climate is a geographical factor ot 
unusual significance. The prevailing westerly winds bring to them 
from the Pacific Ocean the uniform temperature conditions which 
prevail ov-er this great water area. Seasonal temperature ranges are 



468 Geography 

therefore slight and the annual isotherms extend practically north 
and south. Seattle, although in the latitude of the northern part 
of Maine, seldom has snow enough to make the use of sleighs possible, 
and San Diego, in the latitude of Charleston, South Carolina, has 
delightfully cool summers. 

Upon the lofty mountains and in the eastern parts of Oregon and 
Washington low winter temperatures prevail. In much of the area 
diurnal temperature ranges are great. This is due to low relative 
humidity, which causes radiation to go on very rapidly. Even in 
southern California the nights are nearly always cool. This phase 
of the climate is of great value. 

The amount of the annual precipitation, as well as the number 
of rainy days, decreases from north to south. In Seattle the mean 
annual precipitation is 36 inches; in Portland, 45 inches; in San 
Francscio, 22 inches; in Los Angeles, 15 inches, and in San Diego, 
9 inches. This is due to the fact that with the annual movement of 
the earth about the sun, the temperature belts, and hence the wind 
belts, shift north and south. The cyclonic storms which bring the 
rain to the region cut the coast farther north in summer than they 
do in winter. Moft of the precipitation occurs during the winter. 
In Los Angeles about 96 per cent, of the total for the year occurs 
between November 1 and April 30. In Seattle about 75 per cent, of 
the total falls during the same time. The length of the rainy season 
increases with increase in latitude. 

In California there is an interesting inversion of temperature. 
The southern part of the Sacramento valley and the valley of the 
San Joaquin, being cut off from the sea by mountain?, are much less 
subject to winter fog than is the Los Angeles Coastal Plain. As a 
result, they experience higher temperatures and an earlier ripening 
of fruit. Fruits from the central part of .the state 500 miles north 
of Los Angeles are on sale in that city several weeks earlier than the 
same fruits ripen in the south. 

The mild conditions of temperature have resulted in making the 
Pacific Coast States a great fruit-growing area. Oregon produces 
many apples, peaches, pears, cherries, prunes and small fruits. 
California leads the Union in the production of peaches, apricots, 
prunes, oranges, lemons and grapes. It produces nearly all of the 
raisins, figs, olives and dates grown in our country. 

As applied to the production of raisins and the drying of decidu- 
ous fruits, the absence of summer rains is an advantage that can 
scarcely be overestimated, for the drying can be performed in the 



The Pacific Coast States 469 

open air at slight cost. The dry summers are of great value to grain 
and hay crops, as there is no loss because of storms and the low rela- 
tive humidity makes possible the use of combined harvesters. 

The character of the climate is attfacting large numbers of 
people to the Pacific Slope. During the decade closing with 1920 
the population of the United States increased 14 per cent., that of 
Washington 18 per cent., that of Oregon 16 per cent., and that of 
California 44 per cent. This increase in population is very small 
as compared with that of the previous decade. The slowing-up 
was, in larp;e part, due to the many restraining conditions resulting 
from the World War. 

Industries. — For a number of years following 1848 mining was 
almost the only industry in California. As the yield of the streams 
and mines began to decrease, and with the increasing demand for 
supplies of food, a part of the population naturally turned to agricul- 
ture. The ease with which the land could be cultivated in the Great 
Valley, the absence of forests to be cleared away and the fertility 
of the soil all favored this industry. 

Wheat has always been an important crop in these states, but as 
the advantages to be derived from fruit culture became more evident, 
wheat growing has declined relatively in favor of horticulture. 
Wheat is yet the leading crop in Washington and Oregon, and is one 
of the exports of all three states. 

Irrigation, which greatly* increases the certainty of crops, has 
done much to promote agriculture in this section. Large areas, but 
a few years ago in a desert condition, now yield immense crops and 
support a prosperous population. In eastern Washington, for ex- 
ample, good apple orchards are wort|;i $1,000 per acre. Among the 
important government irrigation projects are the Klamath, partly 
in California and partly in Oregon, and the North Yakima Project 
in south-central Washington. 

In California the citrus fruit industry has assumed vast propor- 
tions, and in all of the states of this group fruits are dried and canned 
in large quantities. Apple growing in Oregon and in eastern Wash- 
ington is important. 

As has been indicated, lumbering is an important industry in the 
Coast Range north of San Francisco, on the western slope of the 
Sierra Nevada and in Oregon and the Puget Sound country. In 
Washington the forests form the chief basis of industrial development. 

Fishing in Puget Sound, in the Columbia and in the lower Sacra- 
mento is important. Great quantities of canned salmon are exported. 



470 Geography 

Until recent years, owing to lack of coal, there has been little 
manufacturing. The use of crude oil and of electrical energy devel- 
oped from water power have led to a marked development in manu- 
facturing, however, A large amount of power can be developed from 
the streams because of their great fall. At Spokane power has been 
developed from the river of the same name and is used in the manufac- 
ture of flour. Seattle has an abundance of cheap power obtained 
from the streams that flow from Mt. Kainier. The Puget Sound 
Light and Power Company, utilizing water from Lake Tapps, which 



Fia. 179.— Mt. Riimei. from ludiaa Henry's Hunting GcouDcb. 

is southeast of Tacoma, has developed 80,000 horse-power. Portland 
derives power from Mt. Hood, and the Falls of the Willamette have 
led to manufacturing at Oregon City, Oregon. 

It is estimated by Clapp and Henshaw in Water Supply Paper 
271, page 118, that 6,000,0(XI horse-power can be developed from the 
streams of California. Approximately one-half of this total is in the 
Sacramento ba^in. At present, power is transmitted to the Bay 
cities from the Feather and the Yuba Rivers. Los Angeles and other 
cities in southern California are using power developed from the 
mountain streams. It is estimated that the Owens River Project 
will furnish to Los Angeles and vicinity 100,000 horse-power. 



The Pacific Coast Htates 



Los Angeles. — la California there are two great centers of popu- 
lation, Los Angeles and San Francisco. Los Angeles is situated upon 
the fertile coastal plain, where water can easily be secured and where 
the climate is delightfully tempered by the sea breeze. The roadf^ 
that make use of the passes leading from the Central valley, as well 
as those that enter the coastal plain by way of the Cajon and the 
San Gorgonio Passes, naturally converge here. 



Fio. 181.— The l.M Angelea aQiiedudt, (Courtesy W. G, Scott.) 

Los Angeles is nearly 20 miles from the sea, but a good harbor 
has been developed at San Pedro, where the government has expended 
some 85,000,000. The city has annexed what is known as the "shoe 
string" strip extending to the harbor and including the city of San 
Pedro. Los Angeles is therefore in effect a seaport. 

A few years ago the city at great cost undertook to bring water 
from Owens River, some 200 miles distant. As the aqueduct was 
constructed across a desert and as mountains had to be tunneled, the 
project was one of great importance. Water more than sufficient to 
meet all iieeds is now available, and, as stated above, much power 
has been created. 

Los Angelea is the supply center for a lat^ agricultural area. 
It also furnishes machinery and other supplies to mining companies 



The Pacific Coast States 473 

operating upon the Mohave Desert and in Arizona. It has railroad 
connections with the East by way of the Southern Pacific, Santa F6 
and Salt Lake Railroads, and with the North and also the East, by 
way of San Francisco, over the Southern Pacific. 

In 1781 the Spanish founded a settlement where now is situated 
Loa Angeles. In 1846 the town came into the possession of the 
Americans. So slowly did the town develop that in 1885 its popular 
tion was but little more than 11,000, According to the census of 
1920, Los Angeles had a popiilatton of 576,673, a gain during the 
decade ending with that year of 80 per cent. 



Fiu. 183,— The Golden Gate. San Franeisoo Bay. (CourtMy Souttern Pacific Company.) 

Los Angeles has foundry and machine shops, and car shops where 
ears are made and repaired. Much meat is packed here, and some 
f.our is manufactured, partly from wheat grown in the near-by San 
Fernando valley. The city handles much lumber, most of which 
is landed at San Pedro. The extensive development of the fruit 
industry in the surroundii^ section has led to the manufacture of 
boxes of many kinds, and the honey industry is responsible for the 
manufacture of hives. Clay is found in abundance in the vicinity, 
and there are several brick-making establishments, and tile and sewer- 
pipe are made. 

San Francisco. — Although California has nearly 1,000 miles of 
coast line, San Francisco Bay is the only one that extends into the 



174 Geography 

heart of the state. Here there is an area of about 300 square miles 
affording deep and protected anchorage. The bay was formerly a 
valley formed by faulting. As a result of subsidence the ocean flooded 
the valley, converting it into a bay, the islands in which are partially 
submei^ed hills. The valleys of the Sacramento and the San .Joaquin 
lead directly from the north and the south respectively to this bay, 
thiLs makine a lai^e part of the state directly tributary to it. Truckee 



FiQ, 1S3.— Bird'B-eyo vion ot Portland. OreBOD. Mt. Hood in the diatsDce. 

and Beckwith Passes are the natural gateways on the landward side. 
The position of the bay makes the cities upon its shores the great 
ports and distributing centers of the state, and here we find one of the 
two great centers of population and industry. San Franckco in 1920 
had a population of 508,401, and its increase durii^ the decade 
closii^ in 1020 was 22 per cent. 

The Metropolitan District on the Bay includes San Francisco, 
Oakland, Alameda, Berkeley and much other territory. Here ships 
from all parts of the world discharge and receive cargoes. Tea, silk, 



The Pacific Coast States 475 

and rice from the Orient, coffee and rubber from Brazil and si^;ar 
from Hawaii are amoi^ the imports. Wheat, lumber, dried fruita 
and canned salmon are some of the exports. 

In 1910 San Francisco and Oakland had S3 per cent, of the total 
population of the Metropolitan District, 88 per cent, of the manufac- 
turii^ establishments, employed 85 per cent, of the labor and in 
point of value produced 78 per cent, of the manufactured articles. 

In San Francisco the leading industries are meat packing, manu- 
facture of tools and machinery, baking, roasting of coffee and spices, 
canning and preserving fruits, refining of sugar, the manufacture 
of lumber and timber products and the making of men's clothing. 






Ii Caecsde Mountaim in 



In Oakland the production of bakery goods, canned and preserved 
fruits, twine and foundry and machine shop goods are important 
industries. Oakland has done a wonderful work in improving her 
harbor facilities. 

Portland, which was named in honor of Portland, Maine, is practi- 
cally at the junction of the Willamette and the Columbia Rivera. 
It is therefore at the crossing of the two routes of trade, and it draws 
upon large areas rich in natural resources. Being at the head of 
deep-sea nav^ation gives the city yet another advantage. An abun- 
dance of cheap power is obtained from the streams that flow westward 
from Mt. Hood and other mountains of the Cascade System. This is 
used in lignting, transportation and in manufacturing. 

Portland exports lumber, wheat, flour, apples, canned salmon and 



476 Geogeapht 

wool. Its chief .imports are furniture, carpets, machinery, hardware, 
silk, tea, coffee, epices and burlap. In 1920 it had a population of 
258,288, and the increase during the decade ending in 1920 was 24 
per cent. 

Seattle occupiea a most advantageous position on Puget Sound. 
In front of her lies Elliott Bay, an arm of the Sound affording deep 
water, and behind her is Lake Washington. The city is situated 



Tia. 185.— Mt. Rainier from Paradise Valley. Neequally Glacier in the foreground. 

upon an arm of land between the two bodies of water, which are now 
connected by a canal. 

In the immediate vicinity of Seattle are great forests. Indeed, 
in 1852 a man named Yesler put up a ^team saw mill where is now 
the heart of the city. On the shores of Lake Washington there are 
saw mills where immense logs are being converted into lumber, and 
shingles and lumber are two of the leading exports of Seattle. 

East of the Cascade Mountains lies the Inland Empire, a region 
rich in wheat and apples. Some of the wheat of this area reaches 
Seattle and is from there exported. Canned salmon in large quantities 



Seattle is the chief supply depot for Alaska. By means of the 



The PACinc Coast States 477 

"Inland Passt^e" there is a sheltered water route as far as Skagvay. 
Provisions, clothing, mining machinery, cans and boxes are shipped 
to the various fishing towns along the coast and to the mining dis- 
tricts in the interior. Gold and salmon are shipped from Alaska to 



Fia. 1S6.— A Bcene Id Spokane. 

Seattle. During the summer season 10 or more vessels leave Seattle 
for Alaska weekly. 

Four railroads connect the city with the East, and steamship 
lines carry on commerce with the Orient, Coffee, tea, silk, sugar, 
spices, cotton, hides, meats, furniture and hardware are the 
leading imports. 



478 * Geography 

Power for manufacturing as well as for illumination and trans- 
portation is developed from streams which flow from Mt. Rainier. 

Seattle was built upon very hilly ground, the deposits of glaciers. 
Just a few years ago the people determined to remedy this. 
MiUions of dollars have been spent in cutting down hills by the use 
of hydrauUc force. Streets to the extent of many miles have been 
entirely regraded and large numbers of houses were kept blocked 
up on stilts while the dirt beneath was removed and then lowered 
many feet. The glacial drift upon which the city is built made this 
work much less expensive than it would otherwise have been. During 
the decade ending in 1920 the population increased 33 per cent, and 
in 1920 was 315,652. 

Spokane. — Fifty miles from where the Spokane River unites 
with the Columbia is situated Spokane, an important industrial and 
railroad center. It is the chief distributing point for a large area in 
eastern Washington, northeastern Oregon and northern Idaho. 

Within the great bend of the Columbia wheat and fruits are 
grown extensively. Much wheat is milled at Spokane because of 
the power furnished by the Spokane River, which has a fall of 150 
feet within the city. Power is transmitted to the Coeur d'Alene 
silver-lead mining district in northern Idaho, about IQO miles distant, 
and is used in Spokane in various industries and in transportation. 

Owing to the great resources of the tributary country, and to the 
power furnished by the river, Spokane has had a remarkable growth 
during recent years. In 1920 its population was 104,437, and it 
ranked second among the cities of Washington in this respect. 

STUDIES 

Make a study of the advantages and disadvantages in the position of the 
Pacific Coast States. What would be the result if the Coast Mountains were 
higher than the Sierra Nevada and the Cascade Mountains? Locate all of the 
passes mentioned. Show how mineral wealth has influenced the development 
of the area. How is climate related to lumbering? Account for the position 
of the isotherms, as shown on an annual isothermal chart. How is the fertility 
of the soil in the semi-arid sections related to light rainfall? What has been 
done to increase the commercial importance of the Columbia River? Show 
why these states have increased in population so rapidly. 

REFERENCES 

Arnold, Ralph: "The California Oil Industry." Jotir. o/ Geog.f vol. ix, p. 270. 
"Climatology of California." Bulletin "L," U. S. Weather Service. 
Carpenter, Ford A.: "The Climate and Weather of San Diego^^ Calif." 



The Pacific Coast States 479 

Chamberlain, James F.: ''Geographic Influences in the Development of Cali- 
fornia." Jotir. o/Geogr., vol. ix, p. 253. 

Fairbanks, Harold W.: "The Geography of Cahfomia." 

HoLWAY, RuLipp S.r "Topographic Environment of San Francisco." Jour, of 
Geog., vol. ix, p. 261. 

Hubbard, George D.: "Death Valley." Jour. ofGeog., vol. xiii, p. 277. 

LouDERBACK, George D. : "Lake Tahoe." Jour, of Geog., vol. ix, p. 277. 

McAdie, Alexander G.: "The Rainfall of CaUfomia." University of Calif. 
PubliccUionSf vol. i. No. 4, p. 127. 

MuiR, John: "The Mountains of California." 

Pierson, Mabel: "The Yosemite Valley." Jour, of Geog., vol. ix, p. 265. 

Reed, William G.: "The Climatic Provinces of the Western United States." 
BuM. Am. Geog. Soc.j vol. xlvii, p. 1 

Snyder, Wm. H,: "Geographical Determinants of Los Angeles." Jour, of Geog., 
vol. ix, p. 275. 

Telker, Minna J.: "The Cascade Mountains." Jour, of Geog.j vol. xiii, p. 242. 

"The Shasta Route and Coast Line." U. S. Geological Survey Bull. 614, 1915. 

"Washington: Physical Geography, Climate, Resources, Industries, Cities." 
Jour, of Geog.f vol. xiv, pp. 309-372. 



CHAPTER XLVII 

Alaska 

Area and Population. — The combined areas of France, Germany 
and the British Isles do not equal that of Alaska. Practically 12 
states, each having an area equal to that of New York, could be made 
from Alaska. In 1920 the population of this vast area was but 64,356. 
Unlike the states in the western part of our counti^, Alaska showed 
little increase in population during the decade ending with 1920. 
A large part of the total population is situated close to the coast. 
This is in part a response to favorable climatic conditions, and in 
part a response to conditions which favor the fishing industry. 

Influence of Climate. — In Alaska latitude is not the chief factor 
in determining climate. The southern part of the territory, as far 
north as the middle of Hudson Bay and Point Barrow, is 10 degrees 
north of the northern coast of Labrador, yet the climate along the 
southeastern coast of Alaska is very mild. 

At Sitka the mean January temperature is but SI*' F., and the 
mean August temperatm-e is 55° F. At Point Barrow the mean 
temperatures for the same months are — 15*^ F. and 38° F. Mildness 
and slight seasonal ranges characterize temperature conditions along 
the coast, while in the interior the ranges are great. Winter tempera- 
tures in the interior fall to — 70° F. in some places, and the ground, 
except close to the surface, is permanently frozen to a depth of many 
feet. Low temperatures keep the Yukon closed to navigation for 
more than one-half of each year. 

Along the Pacific coast precipitation is very high because the 
Coast Range causes the westerly winds to give up their moisture. 
The annual precipitation varies from 50 to 190 inches. At Sitka 
there are on the average 207 days each year on which rain or snow 
falls. The precipitation in the interior is light, ranging from 11 to 
21 inches annually. 

The climate exerts a marked control over dress, character of 
homes, heating and lighting, industries and means of transportation. 
When the Yukon River, which is the natural route to the interior, 
is closed by ice, sledges drawn by reindeer or dogs are, aside from 
travel on foot, the only means of transportation. 

The Coast Line. — Southeastern Alaska has a fiorded coast line of 
remarkable irregularity. Including the minor irregularities — and 

480 



Alaska 481 

these must be surveyed — the total length of the coast line of the terri- 
tory is placed at 26,376 miles. The character of the coast line is in 
part the result of a drowning of the region and is in part the result 
of glacial action. Between the mainland and the countless islands 
which lie off shore there is a sheltered channel nearly 1,000 miles in 
length and extending from Seattle to Skagway. This channel is 
known as the "Inside Passage" and is much used by coastwise vessels. 
Nature has here produced a coast line which for grandeur of 
scenery is excelled in few parte of the world. It is yearly beii^ enjoyed 



by larger numbers of people. The deep and protected anchorages 
in the fiords furnish the sites for the fishing and canning stations. 

Because of the irregularities of the coast, the prevalence of fogs 
and the increasing commerce and tourist business, the maintenance 
of lights along the Inside Passage is a matter of much importance. 
Many of the lights are operated by acetylene gas and burn continu- 
ously for a period of about 6 months. This makes it unnecessary 
to station lighthouse keepers at these points. 

Topography. — The Coast Mountains rise very precipitously from 
the water's edge. A large number of the peaks are snow covered and 
many glaciers descend to the Pacific. Some of these are quite acces- 
sible from the Inside Passage and a large number are visible. The 
mountains are a great barrier to those who wish to reach the interior 
from the southeast. The White Horse Pass and Yukon Railroad 



482 Geography 

follows the course of the trail over which so many thousands passed 
in the years immediately following the discovery of gold in the 
Klondike. Skagway is at the seaward end of this railway, which 
afiFords an easy entrance to the Yukon valley. 

Some of the Coast Mountain?, are volcanic. The eruption of 
Mt. Katmai; which is on the west shore of Shelikof Strait, about 100 
miles from Kodiak, was probably the most violent volcanic action 
ever recorded, and yet no loss of life resulted. This is in large measure 
due to the fact that the country is very sparsely populated. The 
sound of the explosion was heard in Juneau, 750 miles distant, and 
dust fell in considerable quantities at that place. At Kodiak darkness 
reigned for 60 hours, so great was the quantity of dust in the air. 
The only active volcano in the interior, so far as now known, is Mt. 
Wrangell, altitude about 14,000 feet. 

Mt. McKinley, in the Alaskan range, is 20,300 feet in height, and 
under favorable conditions is visible for more than 100 miles. 
Although there are various ranges in the interior, the general charac- 
ter of the surface is that of a plateau or a plain. There are vast 
stretches of tundra and there are areas where there is excellent sum- 
mer pasturage. Owing to the light precipitation and the long annual 
period of very low temperature, there is comparatively little timber. 

Rivers. — The one great river of Alaska is the Yukon, and it 
is one of the great rivers of the world. Its head waters are in 
British Columbia, and as has been stated, the valley can be reached 
by way of the White Horse Pass and Yukon Railroad. There are 
canyons through which the river runs rapidly and flats across which 
it flows sluggishly, frequently changing its channel. This makes 
navigation difficult. 

The river is open to navigation for less than one-half of the year, 
but during this time it* is the chief route to the interior. Several 
distributaries extend across the delta. The northern channel, known 
as Apoon Pa^s, is the one commonly used. It has a minimum of 4 
feet of water. There is no harbor on the delta, but there is an inferior 
one on St. Michael Island, 60 miles distant. Here seargoing boats 
load and unload, and hence St. Michael has assumed some importance. 

Furs. — For many years furs constituted the only source of wealth. 
Both sea and land animals were utilized. The fur seals make their 
summer home in the Pribilof Islands. The animals are killed under 
government regulation and upon payment of a stipulated sum to 
the government. Pelagic or ocean sealing has greatly reduced the 
number of seals. The mmiber killed in 1867 is variously estimated at 



Alaska 483 

from 2,000,000 to 4,000,000. In 1918 only 35,000 were killed. The 
average value of the fur of a seal is about $30.00. 

In addition to the fur seals, there are foxes, beaver, muskrats and 
other land animals the furs of which are commercially valuable. 
A first-grade black or silver-gray fox is worth more than $1,000.00. 
The total value of the furs, chiefly seal, taken in Alaska since the 
purchase is about $60,000,000. 

Mineral Wealth. — In 1880 a man named Juneau discovered gold 
on Douglap Island, and later it was discovered in the interior. The 
long winters in the interior are an obstacle to mining. From 1880 
to 1919, inclusive, Alaska has yielded about $311,000,000 worth of 
gold, and in the last named year it ranked third in the output of 
this metal. The cost of transporting machinery to the mines in the 
Yukon district is very great. The famous Treadwell Mine, being 
situated at tidewater, has a great advantage in this respect. In the 
interior placer mining is carried on extensively. 

In addition to gold, there are copper, lead, silver, tin, petroleum, 
coal and other forms of mineral wealth. There are large deposits 
of anthracite coal. So cheap is water transportation, however, that 
coaI is shipped to Alaska from Seattle. In the neighborhood of 90 
per cent, of the value of the total mineral output is in the form of gold. 

Fishing. — During recent years the fishing industry has developed 
remarkably in Alaska. The sheltered Inside Passage and the tidal 
streams favor fishing, and the location of canneries and salteries. 
Many little fishing villages are located at the heads of the fiords, and 
new canneries and salteries are established yearly. 

Although the salmon is the chief fish taken, cod, halibut and 
herring are being caught in increasing numbers. Probably eight- 
ninths of the value of the total catch is represented by the salmon. 
Halibut are shipped to Seattle packed in glacier ice. From 1867 to 
1919, inclusive, the value of the fish taken in Alaskan waters was 
more than $300,000,000. Some 200,000,000 cans of sahnon are 
shipped yearly. 

Although there is much timber along the coast, some of the mate- 
rial for the cases in which the cans of salmon are packed is shipped 
from Seattle. This is because there is timber immediately tributary 
to Seattle, water transportation is cheap and labor in Alaska is 
very high. Alaska cannot export lumber, as the laws of the terri- 
tory forbid this. Wood is bm-ned on the Yukon steamers and 
timbers are used in the mines. Probably the pulp industry will in 
time develop. 



484 Geography 

Alaska has a considerable number of establishments engaged in 
producing lumber products, but the total value of the output is 
relatively small. Spruce is the chief lumber used. Material for 
salmon cases, shingles, building, mine-props and piling in part meets 
the local demand. 

Agriculture. — For many years no one believed that agriculture 
could be carried on in Alaska. Now there seems to be danger that 
the agricultural possibilities will be exaggerated. The climatic condi- 
tions are most favorable along the southeastern coast, and here there 
is little land available. In the interior the short growing season 
is in part balanced by the very long days. 

The total area of the cultivated land in Alaska is small. Along 
the coast where the climate is most favorable the country is very 
mountainous. In the interior the growing season is short and 
transportation facilities are poor. Both of these conditions limit 
agriculture. Excellent barley, wheat, oats, potatoes and vegetables 
are grown in small quantities near the coast. Very fine berries are 
produced and several varieties of apples are grown. 

Naturally domestic animals are not very numerious." Many years 
ago our government introduced reindeer into Alaska. These hardy 
animals were brought in from Siberia. They are of great value to 
the people, especially to the natives, who obtain from them meat, 
milk and material for clothing. The reindeer are important in 
transportation also. For the last named purpose dogs in consider- 
able numbers are used. Cattle are much more numerous than are 
horses, hogs or sheep, and grazing is certain to increase in impor- 
tance. As conditions become better known, Alaska may produce a 
large part of her own food supply, but there is little indication 
that she will ever be an exporter of agricultural products. 

Roads. — Lack of cheap transportation always retards develop- 
ment. Owing to isolation and to climatic and topographic conditions, 
the cost of building roads of any kind in Alaska is very great. There 
are only about 1,000 miles of wagon and railroad in the entire terri- 
tory. The cost of shipping goods from Seattle to the interior varies 
from $5.00 to $200 per ton, according to the nattu-e of the commodity. 

Influence of Scenery. — One of Alaska's sources of wealth 
is her beautiful scenery. As this cannot be exhausted through use, 
the returns will steadily increase as the country becomes better 
known. The Inside Passage affords a summer trip that is probably 
unexcelled. There is little rough water, and the countless wooded 
islands, the snow-capped peaks, the great glaciers and the beautiful 



Alaska ^5 

fiords, with their picturesque fishin|; villages, combine in afFording 
rest, pleasure and profit. There are fiords as grand as those of 
Norway; islands as beautiful as those in the St. Lawrence; moun- 
tains more lofty than any in the Alps, and glaciers larger and more 
magnificent than those of Switzerland. 

Cities.^AIaska has no large city, Fairbanks, in the interior on 
the Tanana River, ia a distributing point for a large area. In 1910 
it was the largest city and had a population of 3,541. Nome, on the 



south shore of Seward Peninsula, is about 140 miles south of the 
Arctic Circle. It owes its importance to the fact that there b here 
much dredging for gold. So far north Js it that in June no artificial 
light is needed between two o'clock a.m. and nine o'clock p.m.' 
Skagway is at the northern end of the Inside Passage and is the coast 
terminal of the White Horse Pass and Yukon Railway. Juneau 
the capital, is situated on the coast at the foot of the mountains of 
the same name. 

It is evident that the purchase of Alaska from Russia in 1867 
for $7,200,000 was a very good investment. The territory has 
paid for itself many times. The area is in its infancy, and the value 
of its minerab, fish, forest and agricultural products will increase 



486 Geography 

for many years. There are vast kelp beds which will probably be 
used in the manufacture of potash. As new roads are built the cost 
of transportation, and therefore the cost of living, will decrease. 
In proportion to its area, however, the country will never support 
a large population. 

STUDIES 

Draw, to the same scale, rectangles showing the comparative areas of Alaska 
and the United States proper. What is the most important geographic factor 
in Alaska? Explain fully. Why is the national government giving so much 
attention to the development of Alaska? Discuss the probable increase in popu- 
lation. What are the opportunities for agricultural development? 

REFERENCES 

Brooks, Alfred H. : "The Coal Deposits of Alaska.'' Annals Association of 

Am. GeographerSy vol. i, p. 85. " 
Gordon, G. B.: "Tn the Alaskan Wilderness.'' 
Greely, a. W.: "Handbook of Alaska, 1909." 
Greely, a. W. : "The Economic Evolution of Alaska." Nat. Geog. Mag., vol. 

XX, p. 585. 
Griggs, R. F.: "The Valley of Ten Thousand Smokes." Nat. Geog. Mag.j vol. 

xxxi, p. 12, and vol. xxxiii, p. 115. 
Martin, Laurence : "Geographic Influences in Alaska." Jour, of Geog., vol 

ix, p. 65. 
Underwood, John J.: "Alaska." 



CHAPTER XLVIII 

Insular Possessions of the United States 

porto rico 

General Statement. — In the year 1493 the island of Porto Rico 
was discovered by Columbus. A century before the founding of 
Jamestown the first white settlement was established in Porto Rico. 
Early in the sixteenth century Ponce de Leon founded a town to 
which he gave the name of San Juan Baptista de Puerto Rico. From 
this town the island derived it? nanie, which means ''Rich Port'' or 
*'The Gateway of Wealth." With the exception of a few weeks 
during the year 1597, Porto Rico was continuously held by the 
Spanish until the signing of the Treaty of Paris on December 10, 
1898. By this act Spain ceded the island to the United States. 

Topography. — Porto Rico has little level land. Most of the area 
is mountainous or hilly. This does not prevent cultivation, however, 
for the stickiness of the soil and the forest cover have hindered rapid 
erosion. The chief uplift extends in a general east to west direction, 
thus dividing the island into a north and south slope. The relation 
between the trend of these mountains and the northeast trade winds 
is such as to cause the north slope to be well watered and the south 
slope to be deficient in rainfall. 

Influence of Climate. — Owing to its latitude, Porto Rico has a 
warm climate. Nowhere is the altitude sufficient to cause cold 
weather. As no point is far from the ocean, the temperatures are 
moderate and the ranges slight. The mean annual temperature 
at San Juan is about 78° F. Temperatures of 55° to 65° F. are con- 
sidered cold by the natives. Snow and ice are unknown even upon 
the mountains. 

As has been stated, the northeast trades bring heavy precipita- 
tion to the northern slope. On El Yunque, the most lofty mountain 
on the island, altitude 3,609 feet, the average annual precipitation 
is about 130 inches. At San Juan the rainfall averages more than 
50 inches yearly. In December, 1893, the rainfall in this city 
amounted to 17.66 inches. 

Because of the greater precipitation on the north slope, this area 
has more timber than has the southern. Upon the drier southern 
slope agriculture in a measure gives place to pasturage. Irrigation 
is practiced, and more extensive projects have been planned. 

487 



488 Geography 

lodustries. — Agriculture is the one great induatry in Porto Rico, 
and nearly alt of the total area ie in farms. High temperature and 
abundant rainfall cause a rapid weathering of the rocks and conse- 
quently soil covers the mountaine to their summits. Agricultxu^ 
is therefore practiced upon very steep elopes. 

Owing to the tropical climate, sugar, coffee, tobacco and fruits 
Me extenHively grown. Sugar is by far the most valuable crop, and 
for the three years ending with 1919 the average value of the crop 
was about $56,000,000, The areas tributary to Ponce and Arecibo 
are the most important. On the slopes, ranging from 600 to 2,400 
feet in altitude, coffee and tobacco are the leading crops. 



-1 



The freedom from frosts, the cheap labor and the transportation 
by water give Porto Rico a great advantage in the production of 
citrus and other tropical fruits. Owing in part to the work of the 
Experiment Stations, the exportation of fruits has had a remarkable 
growth. The fruit industry is rapidly increasing in importance, the 
exports of citrus fruits in 1919 being worth more than $1,500,000. 
During the same year the value of the pineapples exported was more 
than $1,000,000. The yield of coffee is being increased through the 
work of the Experiment Stations. 

Most of the manufacturing and most of the commerce of Porto 
Rico grow out of the sugar, coffee, tobacco and fruit crops. Sugar, 
molasses, coffee and tobacco constitute a very large part of the total 



Insular Possessions op the United States 489 

value of all exports. There is no mineral fuel in Porto Rico, and the 
use of wood for such manufacturing as is carried on is a considerable 
drain upon the forest wealth. 

Roads. — ^A railroad extends along the northern lowlands nearly 
the full length of the island, connecting with San Juan. Another 
railroad serves the great sugar districts in the south and southwest, 
connecting Ponce and Mayaguez. A splendid wagon road extends 
across the island from San Juan to Ponce. 

Cities. — Practically all of the cities are on or near the coast. 
San Juan, the most populous city, is situated on a small island off 
the north coast. It is connected with the mainland and a good 
harbor by a causeway and bridges. Its chief exports are coffee and 
sugar. In 1910 its population was 48,716. 

Ponce, on the south coast, is about 3 miles from its port, Playa 
de Ponce, with which it is connected by means of an electric line. 
Sugar, tobacco and fruits are among the exports. Its population 
in 1910 was 35,027. 

Inhabitants. — For an agricultural country Porto Rico is densely 
populated. Although her area is but 3,435 square miles, she had in 
1920 about 1,250,000 people, or 364 per square mile. In 1910 
almost exactly two-thirds of the total population was made up of 
whites, while 30 per cent, were mulattoes and the remainder blacks. 

Schools are multiplying, and yet when the last census was taken 
two-thirds of the total population were imable to write. The people 
have been greatly hampered by the prevalence of the hookworm 
disease. The government has established a large number of dispen- 
saries and is giving free treatment. Thousands of persons have already 
been cured. The scientific study of agriculture, the growth of schools 
and construction of roads are other important causes leading to the 
rapid development of Porto Rico. 

THE HAWAIIAN ISLANDS 

General Statement. — A little more than 2,000 miles southwest 
of San Francisco lie the Hawttiian Islands. As is shown by a map or 
globe, their position is one of extreme isolation, and in early times 
the inhabitants were practically cut off from the rest of the world. 
The position of these islands is today one of great importance, for 
many of the ocean routes across the Pacific converge here. As a 
naval base, a coaling and a cable station the Hawaiian Islands are 
very advantageously situated. A cable completed in 1903 connects 
the islands and San Francisco. 



490 Geography 

Volcanoes. — There are nine inhabited islands in the group, of 
which the most important are Hawaii, Maui and Oahu. The group 
is of volcanic origin and is geologically recent. Hawaii is practically- 
composed of four volcanoes, the largest of which is Mauna Loa. 
The crater of this volcano is, roughly, 3 by 2 miles in its dimensions 
and is 1,000 feet deep. When not in action it is safe to descend to 
the floor of the crater. Streams of lava 50 miles long and one-half 
mile in width have poured from this volcano. Maima Loa is 14,000 
feet in altitude, and as the water close to the shore of the island is 
16,000 feet deep, we can form some conception of the vast quantity 
of lava which has been poinded out and from which the island 
has been built up. The volcanoes of these islands are of the non- 
explosive type. 

Climate. — Owing to the latitude, which is about the same as that 
of the West Indies, the climate is tropical. As a result of the influence 
of water, the climate is remarkably equable. The northeast trade 
winds deposit heavy precipitation upon the windward side of the 
islands, leaving the leeward side quite dry. Because of this distribu- 
tion of moisture, vegetation is much more luxuriant on the east than 
the west slope. 

Agriculture. — Like Porto Rico, the Hawaiian Islands are essen- 
tially agricultm-al. On Hawaii, Maui and Oahu there are large areas 
of deep, fertile soil which has resulted from the decay of the lava. 
Sugar is the chief crop of the islands, its value being greater than 
the combined value of all other crops. A large part of the sugar is 
shipped to San Francisco to be refined. 

The pineapple industry has developed rapidly and now ranks 
next to that of sugar. Coffee, fruits and cocoanuts are grown to 
some extent. Among cereals, rice ranks first, but because of the large 
Japanese and Chinese population, nearly all of this crop is consumed 
locally. Some experiments have been made in cotton growing, and 
a good quality of fiber has been secured. 

Manufacturing. — There is very little manufacturing aside from 
that growing out of the production of ^gar and pineapples. There 
is no mineral wealth produced upon the islands, and this is a detriment 
to manufacturing. In the manufacture of sugar, the refuse from the 
sugar cane is used as a fuel and this results in a considerable saving. 
Pineapples are canned and shipped to the United States. 

History. — Probably the first white men to see these islands were 
some Spanish sailors who were wrecked here in 1527. In 1778 
Captain Cook visited the group, and as early as 1820 American 



is 

O 

H 



m 
> 

OD 




Insular Possessions of the United States 491 

miB^ionaries began to work with the natives. In 1898 the islands 
were annexed to the United States, and two years later a territorial 
government was organized. 

Cities. — The chief city is Honolulu, which in 1920 had a popula- 
tion of about 80,000. Near the city is Pearl Harbor, a land-locked 
lagoon 4 by 8 miles in ita dimensions and having a depth ranging 
from 30 to 130 feet. Back of the harbffl- rise mountains from 3,000 
to 4,000 feet in altitude. 

As Honolulu k on the southwest coast of Oabu, its rainfall is 
comparatively light, being about 
25 inches per year. On the oppo- 
site coast the precipitation is more 
than twice as heavy. The mean 
annual temperature is about 75° F. 

Among the important imports 
are coal, machinery of various 
kinds, clothing and food stuffs, 
most of which are obtained from 
the United States. Sugar, copra 
and pineapples are important ex- 
ports. Because of the position 
and ownership of the islani^, the 
investment of American capital 
in the sugar plantations and the 
demand for sugar in our country, 
practically all of this commodity 
is shipped to San Francisco. 

Population.— The area of the 
Hawaiian Islands is about twice 

that of Porto Rico, yet in 1920 ^™' !«>■-«""'""' !""» -^ ""-^ «-- 
the population was only about 250,000. This gave a density of 
36 per square mile. 

Many nationalities are represented, the Japanese most numer- 
ously. This is a natural result of the crowded condition in Japan, 
the similarity in climate and products and the opportunities for 
unskilled labor on the plantations. In 1920 Japanese made up 44 
per cent, of the total population of the islands. 

Many Chinese, Koreans and Filipinos have taken up their resi- 
dence in the Hawaiian Islands. In 1910 the white population was 
23 per cent, of the total, while the natives amounted to but 14 per 
cent. According to the census of 1910, more than one-fourth of the 



492 Geography 

inhabitants could not write. Practically the entire population is 
located upon the four islands of Oahu, Hawaii, Maui and Kauai. 

THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 

General Statement. — It was in 1521, when Magellan was making 
his famous circumnavigation of the globe, that the PhiUppine Islands 
were discovered. They remained in the possession of Spain almost 
continuously until 1898, when, as a result of our war with that country, 
they came into our possession. We paid Spain $20,000,000 for the 
islands, but their exports have since then been worth more than this 
amount yearly. 

There are some 3,000 islands in the group, most of which are but 
patches of rock which rise from a great partially submerged volcanic 
plateau. There are 12 active volcanoes upon the islands, and as a 
natural accompaniment of volcanic activity there are frequent 
earthquake shock? and hot springs are numerous. 

Climate. — Owing to the latitude, the climate upon the lowlands 
is tropical. This fact, together with the high humidity, unfits the 
lowlands for a laboring white class. At higher elevations the climate 
is delightful. 

When summer prevails in the southern hemisphere the northeast 
or dry monsoon blows. With the transference of the greatest heat 
to the northern hemisphere, there is a shift to the southwest or wet 
monsoon. During the change from the one to the other there is a 
period of variable weather. 

Weather conditions are influenced by the typhoons and violent 
thunderstorms. The former are most prevalent in the autumn, 
because then the surface waters of the ocean have reached their 
highest temperature and the superimposed layer of atmosphere is 
warm and light. The thunderstorms occur chiefly during May 
and June. The average annual rainfall at Manila is about 50 inches. 

Forests. — The two essentials for a luxuriant vegetation — high 
temperature and abundant moisture — being present, forests abound. 
From these forests in years to come there will be obtained much 
lumber to be used in furniture and cabinet making. The lack of 
roads, the long distance from markets and the hardwoods yet re- 
maining in the United States prevent their present exploitation. 
The rubber tree, trees which have a medicinal value and others 
valuable in the making of dyes are numerous. One of the most 
useful plants, a tree in appearance but in reality a grass, is the bamboo, 
which the natives use for a variety of purposes. 



118* 



IW 



m* 



124" 



IM^ 



to 



1«(° 



16' 



PHILIPPINE 
ISLANDS 

CNORAVeO BY L.U POATU ENO^ 00^ N.V. 
BoalaofMQM 

I I I — r— » — I I I — r 

10 40 00 80 100180140100 

Important Cities ace shown in 
Heaary Face l>pe 



^ 



14 



It 



10' 



y \>- "" 

-'NOHTH l.-ivAM' I. 
MABUOIS I. 
ITBAVAT I. JUMNCN I. 
BATaN ISiANOS 

^TAN I. 

lAPTANQ I. 
BALIWTAhQll^ 



IBUJ08 I. 



^ 



BAUiiTAKa\ CHANNEL 

ABABUYAN I. 
CALAYAN ljW» ^ 

oAuopiRi i.^buya|i islands 

IRAO I. VUOA |.||CAMIQUIN I. 

'^.BngaRo 
lUaan Pt. 
Cagua 
•ay an L, 






to 



'iHffMorin Bay 



r.HILAI IAN I. 




18 



10 



14 



LINAPACANg^ 



1*1 

ffummock 

^ Alfoaao VI 

WiuMngtoH Pt^ '^ 



C.BvlUuyan^ 



IS 



10 






BANOUKY I. \ 



BORNE 



h 



CfaWATO BtSrS OO., M.Y. 



anotPU 



AfcARAW AMI 



^ BALUT IS. 
I. 



iOsnga 
} Amok .PC 

J 

lojfo Bay k 
^Pujada Bay '^ 
■•CUBAN I. 
'C-San Aguttin 



PAI.MA8 I. 



Loss. 



MAP or THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



Insular Possessions op the United States 493 

Agriculture. — The products of the soil ui the Philippine Islands 
will always be those of chief value. The lowlands are well adapted 
to rice, which is the staple food of the natives. Much of the labor 
on a rice plantation is performed by hand and the remainder by the 
carabao. A few years ago the rinderpest caused the death of about 
90 per cent, of the carabao, and this, together with the ravages of the 
cholera, so reduced the production of rice that famine resulted. 



Through the appropriation of money by Congress these conditions 
have been remeiied. - 

Tropical and subtropical fruits are grown ext«nsively. The 
banana, plantain, orange, pineapple and guava are some of the more 
important ones. 

Manila hemp is the chief export of the islands. Great quantities 
of this are sent to the United- States. Since 1917 the exportation of 
cocoanut oil has assumed great importance. Before that date most 
of the cocoanut exported was in the form of copra. The demand for 
the oil has led to the planting of large numbers of cocoanut trees. 
Other exports are sugar, tobacco, copra and lumber. The farms are 
generally small, for the climate is not such as to encourage or require 



494 Geography 

ptrenuous labor. It is evident that the products of the soil are, in the 
main, those not adapted to large areas in our country, and therefore 
their value to the United States proper is very great. 

Mineral Wealth. — ^Apparently there is considerable mineral 
wealth, but it has not yet been extensively developed. Both coal and 
iron appear to be widely distributed, but there is comparatively little 
local demand for coal for heating purposes and manufacturing is not 
important. As a result of these conditions only a small amount of 
coal is mined. Gold, silver, copper, sulphur and lead are produced 
in small quantities. 

Cities.- -Manila, the commercial center of the Philippine Islands, 
is situated on the southeast shore of the extensive land-locked bay 
of the same name. The six-mile- wide entrance guarded by the island 
of Corregidor opens to the west, and this allows the southwest mon- 
soon to siveep the bay. The government has expended much money 
for the improvement of the harbor. 

Manila is the center of the railroad system of Luzon, and is con- 
nected with all of the provinces by telegraph and with San Francisco 
by cable. As the city is only about 10 feet above sea level the problems 
of drainage and water supply have been difficult to solve. Water is 
now obtained from the mountains some 15 miles distant. 

The Pasig River, a short sluggish stream, flows through the 
city. Large quantities of cocoanuts are rafted down the river to 
Manila, and along its entire course there are villages, gardens and 
duck farms. 

People. — The total area of iihe Philippine Islands is only a little 
greater than that of Colorado, and yet its population is more than 
8,000,000. Most of the^ pepj^e; belong to the Malay race, although 
there are some negritos left. The Filipinos are a teachable people 
and the schools are doing^much^or. their advancement. In addition 
to the native teachers, large numbers of American teachers are 
employed in the public ^^eho^ls. The" primary purpose is to give such 
instruction as will enable the people to become self-supporting and 
reduce the high death rate, especially among children. 

OUR SAMOAN POSSESSIONS 

Far to the westward. of the Hawaiian Islands are the islands of 
the Samoan group. Several of these came into the possession of the 
United States in 1899. The largest and the most important of our 
Samoan islands is Tutuila, the value of which depends chiefly upon 
its excellent harbor. 



Insular Possessions op the United States 495 

Tutuila has its greatest extent from east to west. The eastern 
half is but two or three miles in width. The island is of volcanic 
origin and is quite mountainous. In the warm shore-waters coral 
reefs have been built, and against these the waves pound unceasingly. 

The southeast trade is the prevailing wind and it brings an abun- 
dance of rain to the island. As a result of this and the high temperature 
tropical vegetation clothes the land. The graceful cocoanut, the 
banana and the breadfruit tree are common. As in China, Japan 
and the Philipppines, the bamboo is used for a variety of purposes. 
The taro, sweet potato and rice are grown. Copra is the o|iiy export. 

The harbor of Pago Pago is the water-filled crater of an immense 
volcano. Its narrow entrance is on the south, and the harbor is 
therefore well protected against the prevailing winds and storms. 

GUAM 

Some 1,500 miles east of Manila is the island of Guam, which was 
ceded to the United States by Spain in 1898. Itf importance is 
derived from the fact that it is a landing place for our Pacific cable, 
a coaling station and a naval base. Guam is the largest island of the 
group, to which Magellan in 1521 gave the name of Ladrones (or 
^'thieves") islands because the natives stole one of his rowboats. 

Owing to the small size of the island its climate and weather are 
remarkably uniform. The mean annual temperature is about 80° F. 
The vegetation is of course tropical. The rice grown is chiefly con- 
sumed locally. Corn is a very important article of food and copra 
is exported. Our government has established an experiment station 
the work of which has already been of great value to the natives, who 
are an agricultural people. The chief port is Saji Luis de Apra on 
the west coast. 

THE CANAL ZONE 

At two places nature joined continents in a manner very unfavor- 
able to ocean commerce. At the east end of the Mediterranean Sea 
a land bridge connected Asia and Africa, and North and South 
America were connected by the Isthmus of Panama. 

Until 1869 the water route between Europe and Asia led around 
the Cape of Good Hope. In that year the Suez Canal was completed, 
and this shortened the ocean journey between Europe and the Far 
East by thousands of miles. Not until 1914 was the Isthmus of 
Panama pierced by a canal, thus giving to the world a water route 
which for centuries has been the dream of navigators. 



It was the desire to find a shorter rout« to India, not the hope of 
discovering a new continent, which led Columbus to make his voy- 
ages. Balboa believed in the existence of a strait across the Isthmus 



Pia. leZ.— Bird'>-eye view of Psnama Canal locks. 

of Panama, and Charles V. sent Cortez to search for sach an opening. 
More than four centuries passed before the dream of Columbus was 
realized, however. 

A study of a map of the Western Hemisphere shows that the ocean 
route from New York City to San Francbco by way of Cape Horn 



o 

> 

> 
> 

N 
O 




Insular Possessions op the United States 497 

is about 8,000 miles longer than the route by way of the Panama 
Canal. This makes the importance of the canal apparent. 

About 1850 the United States, because of its acquisition of terri- 
tory in the far West, began to realize the need of a shorter route 
between the Atlantic and the Pacific seaboards. The construction 
of a canal was hindered by our foreign relations. Then came the 
Civil War, and before we were ready to undertake the excavation 
of a canal the French had commenced to work. 

In 1878 France secured a concession from the government of 
Colombia, and the next year the Panama Canal Company was 
organized with Ferdinand de Lesseps as its president. After ten 
years of labor, the expenditure of an enormous sum of money and 
great loss of life, the company went into bankruptcy. 

The people of the United States had not been entirely inactive, 
however. In 1850 permission was secured from Colombia, then 
called New Granada, to build a railroad across the Isthmus of Panama. 
This road was completed in 1855 at a cost of about $7,000,000. 
It has done, and is yet doing, a large amount of business. 

In 1901 a committee, which had been appointed by our govern- 
ment to make a study of the most desirable routes for a canal, reported 
in favor of the Panama route. The next year Congress authorized 
the President to purchase from the Panama Canal Company all of 
its property and rights for the sum of $40,000,000. 

Before the negotiations between the United States and Colombia 
were completed, Panama, then a state of that republic, rebelled. 
It was recognized by the United States and other nations as an 
independent power. Om* government secured from this new republic 
a strip of land ten miles wide lying on each side of the proposed 
canal route. This is now known as the Canal Zone. 

Before the work of constructing the canal could with safety be 
commenced, the country had to be rendered safe from a sanitary 
point of view. This was a tremendous undertaking and required prac- 
tically two years. 

The map shows that the Isthmus of Panama extends in a 
general east to west direction, hence the course of the canal is, roughly, 
from north to south. The Pacific end of the waterway is about 20 
miles east of the Atlantic end. 

The canal is approximately 45 miles long, and about 15 miles 

of the total is at sea level, about one-half of this being at each end. 

From Limon Bay, on the Atlantic side, ships follow a sear-level route 

to Gatun. Here they are raised by locks to Gatun Lake, 85 feet 

32 



« • 



498 Geography 

above the level of the sea. At Pedro Miguel are locks where a cor- 
responding lowering takes place. 

The continental divide is penetrated by means of the Culebra 
Cut. This cut was a most difficult and costly piece of work, and from 
time to time since the opening of the canal business has been tempo- 
rarily suspended because of slides. 

Although the Canal has been in operation but a few years, an 
enormous volume of commerce passes through it. This amounts to 
several million tons annually, and requires a large number of vessels. 
The chief commodities are nitrates, sugar, coal, refined petroleum, 
grain, iron and steel goods and lumber. The coastwise trade of the 
United States is rbore important than that of any other passing 
through the canal. Next in importance is the commerce between 
Europe and the western coast of the Americas. 

During the month of March, 1915, the Panama Canal handled 
more freight than did the Panama Railroad during the year ending 
June 30, 1915. If this railroad had transported the freight which 
was shipped by the canal, more than 14,000 trains of 18 to 20 cars 
each would have been required. 

As the Canal Zone is within the tropics, and as its elevation is 
nowhere great, it has a tropical climate, and a wealth of tropical 
vegetation. The temperature varies from 90° F. diiring the day 
to 70® F. diiring the night. The rainy season lasts from May to 
January. As no settlement is to be permitted within the Canal 
Zone it will rapidly revert to jimgle conditions. 

Our frontage upon two oceans makes the Panama Canal of vast 
importance to us, and our distant possessions fiirnish another impor- 
tant reason why we should be in control of the canal. This water- 
way stands as one of the greatest of human achievements. It is an 
illustration on a gigantic scale of man's response to geographic 
environment. Here a barrier to human progress has been overcome, 
and in the overcoming man has made full use of such advantages 
as nature offered. 

STUDIES 

What conditions favor agriculture in Porto Rico? In what ways is Porto 
Rico valuable to the United States? What retards manufacturing on the Hawaiian 
Islands? Why is so much of the commerce of the Hawaiian Islands carried 
on with our country? To what extent will the Philippine Islands furnish desirable 
homes for white persons? In what way does each of the following areas benefit 
by the Panama Canal: The Atlantic Coast of the United States, the Pacific 
Coast of the United States, Pen;, Brazil, the British Isles? 



Insular Possessions op the United States 499 

REFERENCES 

• 

Cbomwell, Arthur D.: "Observations in Porto Rico." Jowr, of Geog, vol. 

xii, p. 314. 
Fassig, Oliver L.: "The Climate of Porto Rico." Annals Association of Am. 

OeographerSy vol. i, p. 127. 
FoRBES-LiNSAY, C. H..' "America's Insular Possessions," 2 vols. 
Hagberg, J. B.: "Porto Rico." Jour, of Geog., vol. x, p. 96. 
MacCaughey, Vaughn: "The Coral Reefs of the Hawaiian Islands." Jour, of 

Geog. J vol. xiv, p. 252. 
MacCaughey, Vaughn: "The Little End of Hawaii." Jour, of Geog., vol. xv, 

p. 23. 
SiEBERT, William L.: "The Panama Canal." Nat. Geog. Mag., vol. xxv, p. 153. 
U. S. Census Reports (For Hawaii and Porto Rico.) 

Whitbeck, RayH.: "Through the Panama Canal." Jour, of Geog. j vol. xix, p. 223. 
Wright, Hamilton M.: "A Handbook of the Phihppines, 1909." 



INDEX 



Abadl, 217 

Adirondack Mountains, 393 

Aerial navigation, 365 

Aggradation, 117 

Agriculture, 169 

Alaska, 480 

Aluminum, 337 

Altitude, greatest reached, 92 

Amazon &ver, 131 

Anticlines, 111 

Appalachian Mountains, 420 

Province, 420 
Apples, 230 
Argon, 42 

Atlanta, Georgia, 411 
Atlantic Coastal Plain, 372, 403 
Atmosphere^ 35 

composition of, 39 

dust in, 43 

extent of, 38 

general movements of, 49 

humidity of, 42 

origin of, 47 

pressure of, 46 

temperature of, 44 
Automobiles, 353 

Bad Lands, 439 

Baltimore, 410 

Bananas, 239 

Barley, 199 

Base level, 123 

Bee industry, 301 

Beef, 290 

Birmingham, Alabama, 417 

Black HiUs. 438 

Boston^ 389 

Brick mdustry, 329 

Buckwheat, 208 

Buffalo, New York, 401 

Building stones, 326 

Butter, 294 

Cables, ocean, 369 
Caldera, 138 
California, gold in, 12 
Camels, 310 
Cape Cod Canal, 386 
Carabao, 310 
Carbon dioxide gas, 40 
Cascade Mountains, 462 



Catskill Aqueduct, 400 

Mountains, 393 
Cattle, 289 
Cheese, 295 
Chicago, 433 
Chlorophyl, 183 
Cincinnati, 431 
Citrus fruits, 235 
Clay products, 329 
Cleveland, 431 
Climate, 94 
Climate of Alaska, 480 

in the frigid zone, 95 

and man, 1, 94 

oceanic, 97 

permanency of, 99 

m the temperate zone, 96 

tropical zone, 95 
United States, 374 
Clouds, 77 
Coal, 313 
Coast and man, 13 
Coast line, 157 

Coast Range Mountains, 462 
Cocoa, 226 
Cocoanuts, 257 
(offee, 222 
Colorado Canvon, 122 

River, 122 
Columbia River, 464 
Columbus, Ohio, 431 
Communication, 367 
Condensation, 76 
Connecticut River, 384 
Copper, 335 
Cork, 287 
Com, 187 
Corrasion, 122 
Cotton, 205 

Crater Lake, Oregon, 138 
Crops, rotation oi, 175 
Creep, 117 
Cumberland Gap, 422 
Cyclones, 60 

Dairying, 292 
Dates, 241 
Degradation, 117 
Deltas, 127 
Denver, 457 



501 



502 



Index 



Des MoineSy Iowa, 447 
Detroit, 433 
Dew, 76 
Diamonds^ 346 
Diastrophism, 137 
Dismal Swamp, 404 
Distributary, 127 
Dogs, 311 
Doidnim Belt^ 55 
Drainage basm, 129 
Driftless Area, 426 
Drowned valleys, 130, 164 
Duluth, 449 

Earth, diameter of, 18 

form of, 18 

orbit of, 24 
Earthquakes, 110 
Earthworms, work of, 163 
East Central States, 425 
Elephants, 310 
Entrant valley, 122 
Erie Canal, 398 
Erosion, 122 

cycle of, 125 
Eskimos, 3 
Evaporation, 76 

Fall Line, 403 
Falls, 126 
Faults, 111 
FerrePs Law, 20 
Fertilizers, 173 
Fiords, 158 
Fish, 297 

in Alaska, 483 
Flax, 210 
Flood warnings, 91 
Floods, 132 
Florida, 403 
Fog, 77 

Fog in London, 43 
Forests, 261, 467 

and man, 14 

mountains, 104 

national, 267 

in New Eneland, 385 

the PniUppine Islands, 492 

and rainfall, 26(5 
sand dunes, 264 
Forestry, 261 
Frost, 78 
Fruits, 230 
Fur seals, 307, 482 
Furs, 306, 482 

Galveston, 418 



Gary, Indiana, 433 
Geysers, 113 
Glacial drift^ 149 
Glacier National Park, 453 
Glaciers, 143 

in Alaska, 483 

and man, 149 

influence of in New England, 382 
Gold, 338 
Gorge, 123 
Gothard Tunnel, 7 
Grand Canyon of the Colorado, 122 
Grand Rapids, Michigan, 433 
Granite, 326 
Grapes, 234 
Gravitation, 31 
Great Basin Province, 452 
Great Lakes, 129 

commerce on, 130 
influence on climate, 141 
Great Salt Lake, 139, 454 
Greenland, 3 
Guam, 495 
Gulf Plain, 413 
Gutta percha, 285 

Hail, 81 
Harbors, 361 
Hawaiian Islands, 489 
Hay, 252 

Heij^t of Land, 438 
Hemp, 215 
Heneguen, 219 
Himalaya Mountains, 8 
Hogs, 292 
Honey, 301 
Honolulu, 491 
Hops, 256 
Hoosac Tunnel, 382 
Horses, 309 
Hudson River, 394 
Humidit^r, absolute, 75 

relative, 75 
Hurricanes^ 65 
Hygroscopic water, 183 

Ice. 146 

Inoianapolis, 432 
Insolation, 45 

Intermittent streams, 128 
International date line, 20 
Iron, 332, 443 
Irrigation, 176 

projects, 455 
Isobars, 52 
Isotherms. 49 



Index 



503 



Japan, 66 
Jetties, 133 
Juneau, Alaska, 485 
Jute, 216 

Kansas City, Missouri, 446 

Kelp, 173 

Keokuk Project, 440 

Kerosene, 322 

Klamath Lake, 139 

Krakatoa, 43 

Laccoliths, 112 
Lake basins, changes in 140 
origin of, 137 

Dninimond, 405 

Tahoe, 137 
Lakes and man, 141 
Land and sea breezes, 58 
Lassen Peak, 462 
Latitude, 19 
Lead, 336 
Leather, 303 
Lemons, 235 
Levees, 133 
Limestone, 327 
Llamas, 311 
Tx)ngitude, 19, 360 
Los Angeles, 472 

aqueduct, 134 
Lumber, 273 

chief producing states, 279 

Man and climate, 1 

coast line, 13 

forests, 14 

minerals, 11 

rivers, 10 

soil, 9 

topography, 6 
Manila, 494 

hemp, 217 
Marble, 328 
Mate, 228 
Mauna Loa, 490 
Meat, 289 
Memphis, 418 
Mercury, 337 
Milk, 292 
Milwaukee, 435 
Minerals, 313 
Mineral waters, 345 
Minneapolis, 448 
Mississippi River, 128, 414, 434 
Mohawk and Hudson Depression, 394 
Monsoons, 56 
Moon, 29 



Mountain and valley breezes, 58 
Mountains and forests, 104 
man, 101 

origin of, 110 

and water supply, 106 
Mt. Katahdin, 381 

Katmai, 482 

Marcy, 393 

McKmley, 482 

Mitchell, 420 

Washington, 381 
Mules, 309 
Mutton, 291 

Natural gas, 324 
Nebular hypothesis, 32 
New England, 381 
New Orleans, 416 
New York City, 399 

state, 393 
Niagara Escarpment, 126 

Falls, 395 
Nitrogen, 40 
Norway, 160 

Oakland, California, 475 
Oats, 196 
Ocean, 157 

ciurents, 167 

light in 166 

life in, 166 

routes, 359 

temperature of, 166 
OUves, 237 
Omaha, 447 
Oranges, 235 
Osmosis, 183 
Oxygen, 39 
Ozark Uphft, 439 
Ozone, 42 

Pacific Coast Province, 461 
Pago Pago, 495 
Pania-ma Canal, 461, 496 

zone, 495 
Parana River, 131 
Pass, Belfort, 106 

Col de la Perche, 106 

Canfranc, 106 

Dariel, 106 

Truckee, 463 
Peaches, 230 
Peanuts, 258 
Petroleum, 320 
Philadelphia, 408 
Phihppine Islands, 492 
Photosynthesis, 41 



504 



Index 



Pineapples, 238 

Plains, 117 

Planetesimal hypothesis, 32 

Planets, 29 . 

Plants, dispersal of, 185 

Platinum, 337 

Portland, Oregon, 475 

Porto Rico, 487 

Postal service, 367 

Potatoes, 250 

Pottery, 331 

Poultry, 296 

Precipitation, 76 

in Hawaiian Islands, 83 

in India, 83 

on the Sahara, 1 
Providence, 391 
Prunes, 232 
Pyrenees, 7 

Quicksilver, 337 

Railways, 349 

and topography, 351 
Rainfall, 82 

and forests, 82 

production by artificial means, 85 

records for 24 hours, 83 
Raisins, 234 
Reclamation, 176 
Reindeer, 310 
Rejuvenat/cd stream, 125 
Revolution of earth, 24 
Rhine River, 131 
Rice, 199 
River systems, 129 
Rivers and man, 10, 122 
Roads, 347 
Rocly Mountain Province, 452 

Mountains, 372 
Rosin, 287 
Rotation of earth, 19 
Rubber, 282 
Rye, 197 

Sahara, 1 
Salt, 342 

Salt Lake City, 458 
Samoan Islands, 494 
Sandstones, 326 
San Francisco, 473 
Savannah, 411 
Sea breezes, 56 
Seasons, 24 
Seattle, 476 
Sheep, 291, 303 
Sierra Nevada, 461 
Silk, 305 



Silver, 338 
Simplon Tunnel, 7 
Slate, 328 
Snow, 79, 143 

Ime, 143 
Soil, 152 

and man, 9 
Solar system, 29 
Spokane. 478 
Standard time, 21 
St Lawrence River, 129 
St Louis, 443 
St Paul, 448 
Stars, 33 
Storms, 60 
Streams, 127 
Suez Canal, 357 
Sugar, 245 
Sulphur, 344 
Sun, 28 

Superior, Wisconsin, 436 
Switzerland, 7, 109 
Synclines, 111 

Talus, 37 
Tanbark, 287 
Tea, 224 
Telegraph, 368 
Telephone, 368 

Temperature and altitude, 103 
Thermal equator, 55 
Thunderstorms, 69 
Tidal wave, 67 
Tides, 361 
Time, solar, 20 
standard, 21 
Tin, 336 
Tobacco, 254 
Toledo, Ohio, 431 
Topeka, Kansas, 447 
Topography and man, 6 
Tornadoes, 70 
Trade winds, 52 
Transandine Railway, 353 
Traprock, 326 
Transportation by air, 365 

land, 347 

water, 354 
Truckee Pass, 463 
Turpentine, 286 
Tutuila, 494 
Typhoons, 65, 66 

United Kingdom, 158 
States, 371 

climate, 374 
manufactures of, 376 
population of, 377 



1 



Index 



505 



Vesuvius, 113 
Volcanoes, 112 
Volga River, 131 

Wasatch Mountains, 458 
Washington, D. C, 410 
Water power, 7, 127, 408, 470 

table, 128 

vapor, 41 
Waterways, inland, 354 
Weather, 87 

Bureau, 87 

Folklore, 93 
Weieht of bodies, 19 
Welland Canal, 355 
West Central States, 438 
Wheat, 190 
Winds, anti-trade, 55 



Winds, cyclone, 60 

land and sea breezes. 58 
moimtain and valley breezes, 58 
monsoon, 56 
trade, 52 
westerly, 56 

Wine, 234 
Wisconsin, 430 
Wool, 303 

Yangtze River, 156 
Yellowstone National Park, 453 
Yosemite Valley, 464 
Yukon River, 482 

Zinc, 337 
Zones, 27 



INDEX OF AUTHORS 



Adams, Cyrus^C, 380 
Ainsworth, Mitchell C.,325 
Aldrich, Thomas B., 182 
Anderson, Esther S., 260 
Anderson, George E., 358 
Arbor, E. A. N., 325 
Arnold, Ralph, 478 
Atwood, Wallace W., 460 
Austin, O. P., 312, 358 

Bacon, Gertrude, 366 

Bailey, L. H., 186 

Baker, O. E., 204 

Barrows, Harlan H., 437 

Berkey, Charles P., 402 

Bishop, Avard L., 380 

Blackwelder Eliot, 136 

Blanchard, C. J., 180 

Booley, H. L., 221 

Bowie, Edward H., 74 

Bowman, Isaiah, 131, 136, 272 

Brigham, Albert P., 392, 402, 419, 424 

437 
Brooks, Alfred J., 486 
Brown, Robert M., 100, 136 
Bryce, James, 222, 224 

Campbell, Marius R., 325, 460 

Carey, J. P., 74 

Carney, Frank, 437 

Carpenter, Ford A., 478 

Carr, Frank A., 358 

Chamberlain, Arthur H., 272 

Chamberlain, James F., 86, 99, 100, 

142, 272, 479 
Chamberlin, Thomas C, 34, 151 
Chandler, Harley P., 451 
Clark, E. D., 302 

Cleland, Herdman F., 116, 136, 151, 167 
Cleveland, Treadwell, Jr., 264, 272 
Cobb, Corner, 59 
Condra. G. E., 451 
Cook, Charles W., 419 
Cooley, Anna M., 221, 308 
Coulter, John G., 186 
Cromwell, Arthur D., 499 

Dake, C. L., 341, 346 
Darton, N. H., 419 
Darwin, Charles, 154 
David, Evan John, 366 



Davis, William M., 48, 6^, 74, 392, 460 

Day, C. P., 90 

Dearborn, Ned, 308 

Deiteweg, George, 302 

Dexter, Edwin G., 93 

Dodge, Richard E., 17 

Downing, E. R., 156 

Douglass, A. E., 86 

Dryer, Charles R., 437 

EUiott, Guy Mitchell, 180 
Emerson, F. V., 402 
Emerson, Philip, 392 
Engeln, O. D., 451 

Fairbanks, Harold W., 142, 479 
Fairgrieve, James, 17 
Fassig, Oliver L., 65, 74, 499 
Fenneman, Nevin, 380, 412, 445 
Ferris, Richard, 366 
Finch, V. C, 136, 204 
Fletcher, S. W., 156 
Forbes-Linsay, 499 
Frankenfeld, H. C, 93, 132 
Eraser, Edwin R., 244 
Freeman, E. A., 17 

Gannett, Henry, 142 
Gause, Charles C., 358 
George, H. B., 17 
Gibson, Charles R., 369 
Gilbert, Chester G., 325 . 
Gilbert, G. K., 142, 151, 402 
Goode, J. Paul, 17, 437 
Gordon, G. B., 486 
Graham-White, 366 
Greely, A. W., 86, 486 
Gregory, Herbert E., 380 
Gregory, W. M., 419, 437 
Griggs, R. F., 486 
Grosvenor, Gilbert H., 89, 93 
Guyot, Arnold, 97 

Hagberg, J. B., 499 
Haltberger, Michael, 353 
Handy, R. B., 260 
Hann, Julius, 48 
Harrington, Mark, 142 
Harrison, Leslie, 204 
Hartley, C. P., 204 
Hayes, C. Willard, 424 

507 



508 



Index of Authors 



Henry, Alfred J., 86 
Herbertson, A. J., 17, 86, 121 
Herbertson, F. D^ 17, 121 
Hilgard, Eugene W., 155, 156 
Holway, Rufus, 479 
Homburg, Frederick, 136 
Hood, Christopher, 341 
Hooper, Luther, 308 
Hotchkiss, Carohne W., 451 
Hubbard, George D., 392, 479 
Hulbert, Archer B., 358 
Hulbert, George D., 393 
Humphrey, Harry B., 204 
Hunter, J. A., 81, 308 
Huntington, Ellsworth, 100 

Ibbetson, A., 229 

J^erson, Mark, 59, 142, 380, 460 
Joerg, Wolfgang L. G., 380 
Johnson, Willis, 34 
Joss, E. C., 302 

Keable, B. B., 229 
Kearney, Thomas H., 244 
Keir, Malcohn, 167, 392 
Keller, Albert G., 380- 
King, F. H., 156, 180 
Kinne, Helen, 221, 308 
Kirchhofif, Alfred, 17 

Lacy, Walter N., 346 
Langwill, Minnie J., 116 
Laurier, Sir Wilfrid, 272 
Lefferts, Walter, 392 
Leighton,0. M., 376 
Lomen. Carl J., 312 
Louderoack, George D., 142, 479 
Loveland, George A., 82 
Lowell, Percival, 34 
Lyde, L. W., 17 

MacCaughey, Vaughn, 499 
Martin, Lawrence, 437, 486 
Martin, Martha Evans, 34 
Martineau, George, 260 
McAdie, Alexander, 93, 479 
McBride, George McCutcheon, 221 
McFarlane, Charles T., 402 
McGee, W. J., 156 
McMurry, Charles, 180 
Melvin, A. D., 302 
Merrill, George P., 156, 272 
Merrill, O. C, 272 
Middleton, Edgar C, 366 
Milham, WiUis J., 48, 59, 74, 93, 100 
Miller, George J., 451 



Mitchell, George F., 229 

Mitchell, Grey, 325 

Mitchell, Guy Elliott, 325 

Moore, J. R. H., 298, 388 

Moore, Willis L., 48, 59, 74, 89, 91, 93, 

100 
Moran, E. L., 142 
Morley, Margaret W., 116 
Moulton, Forest Ray, 34 
Muir, John, 479 

Nunn, Roscoe, 48 

Olmstead, A. T., 100 

Packard, Leonard, 86, 392 
Parker, Edith P., 325 
Parkins, A. E., 352, 353 
Parkman, Francis, 135 
Peake, R. J., 221 
Pennington, M. E., 302 
Pierce, H. C., 302 
Pierson, Mabel, 479 
Pogue. Joseph E., 325, 346 
Powell, J. W., 412, 460 

Raphael, Zon, 380 
Reed, William G., 479 
Rexford, Miller Eric, 180 
Ridgley, Douglas C, 437 
Reis, Heinrich, 325, 331, 341 
Rolfs, Peter H., 244 
Roorbach, G. B., 156 
Roosevelt. Theodore, 170, 261 
Ross, William H., 180 
Ruskin, John, 115 

RusseU, I. C, 136, 142, 151, 380, 405, 
424, 437, 460 

Salisbury, R. D., 34, 96, 116, 121, 125, 
128, 151, 167 ! 

Scherer. J. A. B., 221 f 

Schoff, Wilfred H., 358 

Scidmore, Eliza, 151 

Semple, Ellen C, 17, 104, 106, 107, 116, 
121, 129, 136, 156, 343, 402, 424 

Serviss, Garrett, 34 

Shaler, N. S., 99, 167 

Shelley, Percy. 151 

Showalter, William J., 341, 402 

Shrader, H. L., 302 

Siebert. Wilham L., 499 

Simonas, Frederick W., 419 

Smith, Herbert, 288 

Smith, Hugh M., 302 

Smythe, WiUiam, 180 

Snyder, Harry, 156 



Index of Authors 



509 



Snyder, William H., 479 
Stevens, H. P., 288 
Stine, O. H., 204 
Surface, G. T., 412 
Sutherland, W. J., 451 

Taft, WiUiam H., 412 ' 
Tarr, R. S., 402 
Telker, Minna J., 479 
Thompson, E. H., 221 
Thompson, Sir Wyville, 167 
Toumey. James W., 262 
Tower, Walter S., 116 
Townsend. C. O., 260 
Turner, Charles C, 366 

Underwood, John J., 486 

Van Cleef, Eugene, 86, 260, 451 



Van Hise, Charles R.. 272, 325, 331, 341 
Vinal, William G., 260 

Waldo, Frank, 48, 59, 74 

Ward, R. DeC., 48, 77, 82, 86, 87, 100, 

224, 229 
Weightman, R. Hanson, 74 
Weller, Annie L., 59 
Whitbeck, Ray H., 9, 108, 116, 136, 

151, 402, 437, 499 
Wilkinson, F., 221 
Williams, Gardiner F., 346 
Willis, Bailey, 424 
Wilson, James, 180 
Woods, Charles D., 204 
Wright, Hamilton M., 499 

Xahm, Albert F., 366 



n 



ii 






14 DAY USE 

RETURN TO DESK FROM WHICH BORROWED 

LOAN DEPT. 

This book is due on the last date stamped below, or ( 
on the date to whidi renewed. 

Renewed books are subject to immediate recalL 

RECTD LD 



m-5^ 







f^QV 61982 



\v 



^<^'^ 



^ 



^ 



J t 



>-_) 



^WATn 



>^ fU'-, 



oj 






f^*^ 



\ 



\ 



REC'D LC) 



OCT 2 2*64 - 



2PW 



)30 



^?f,S€P^27r64 -4 PM 



General Library 

University of California 

Berkeley 



1937 



YC I0I3I 



^'-^^- VS\-^ 



c 



1 > • 



•T 



; / 5 i. ■ 



C 



V 



1 





•\ 



UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA UBRARY 



«• -•» %••*■ •• W «fc 



■f -.' 1. 



> » ■ 



»«^4 i 



jj
